# author: W. S. Gilbert
# language: eng
# source: ProjectGutenberg/ebook_934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934
# licence: public domain in the USA; Project Gutenberg ebook rights affirmation
# edition: Composite Gutenberg transcription credited to the 1920 Macmillan and Co edition of The Bab Ballads and the 1884 George Routledge and Sons edition of Fifty Bab Ballads. The supplied credit does not allocate individual songs between these witnesses. The latest named historical witness is 1920; it is not claimed as each lyric’s first publication.
# attribution: printed author credit retained; see per-item source and batch evidence
# structure: stanza boundaries retained from the supplied edition
# stripped: source typography, stanza numerals, page numbers and editorial apparatus
# songs: 35

--- TITLE: THE FAIRY QUEEN’S SONG [item: PG934-pg934-006]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 329-372; printed page 32)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
OH, foolish fay,
   Think you because
Man’s brave array
   My bosom thaws
I’d disobey
   Our fairy laws?
Because I fly
   In realms above,
In tendency
   To fall in love
Resemble I
   The amorous dove?

[VERSE 2]
         Oh, amorous dove!
            Type of Ovidius Naso!
               This heart of mine
               Is soft as thine,
            Although I dare not say so!

[VERSE 3]
On fire that glows
   With heat intense
I turn the hose
   Of Common Sense,
And out it goes
   At small expense!
We must maintain
   Our fairy law;
That is the main
   On which to draw—
In that we gain
   A Captain Shaw.

[VERSE 4]
         Oh, Captain Shaw!
            Type of true love kept under!
               Could thy Brigade
               With cold cascade
            Quench my great love, I wonder!

--- TITLE: THE DUKE AND THE DUCHESS [item: PG934-pg934-015]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 674-753; printed page 84)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

# APPARATUS: THE DUKE.

[VERSE 1]
Small titles and orders
For Mayors and Recorders
      I get—and they’re highly delighted.
M.P.s baronetted,
Sham Colonels gazetted,
      And second-rate Aldermen knighted.
Foundation-stone laying
I find very paying,
      It adds a large sum to my makings.
At charity dinners
The best of speech-spinners,
      I get ten per cent on the takings!

# APPARATUS: THE DUCHESS.

[VERSE 2]
I present any lady
Whose conduct is shady
      Or smacking of doubtful propriety;
When Virtue would quash her
I take and whitewash her
      And launch her in first-rate society.
I recommend acres
Of clumsy dressmakers—
      Their fit and their finishing touches;
A sum in addition
They pay for permission
      To say that they make for the Duchess!

[VERSE 3]
# APPARATUS: THE DUKE.
Those pressing prevailers,
The ready-made tailors,
      Quote me as their great double-barrel;
I allow them to do so,
Though ROBINSON CRUSOE
      Would jib at their wearing apparel!
I sit, by selection,
Upon the direction
      Of several Companies bubble;
As soon as they’re floated
I’m freely bank-noted—
      I’m pretty well paid for my trouble!

# APPARATUS: THE DUCHESS.

[VERSE 4]
At middle-class party
I play at écarté—
      And I’m by no means a beginner;
To one of my station
The remuneration—
      Five guineas a night and my dinner.
I write letters blatant
On medicines patent—
      And use any other you mustn’t;
And vow my complexion
Derives its perfection
      From somebody’s soap—which it doesn’t.

# APPARATUS: THE DUKE.

[VERSE 5]
We’re ready as witness
To any one’s fitness
      To fill any place or preferment;
We’re often in waiting
At junket fêting,
      And sometimes attend an interment.
In short, if you’d kindle
The spark of a swindle,
      Lure simpletons into your clutches,
Or hoodwink a debtor,
You cannot do better
      Than trot out a Duke or a Duchess!

--- TITLE: THE MERRYMAN AND HIS MAID [item: PG934-pg934-030]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 1310-1383; printed page 182)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
# APPARATUS: HE.
I HAVE a song to sing, O!
# APPARATUS: SHE.
Sing me your song, O!
# APPARATUS: HE.
It is sung to the moon
                     By a love-lorn loon,
      Who fled from the mocking throng, O!
It’s the song of a merryman, moping mum,
Whose soul was sad, whose glance was glum,
Who sipped no sup, and who craved no crumb,
      As he sighed for the love of a ladye.
                           Heighdy! heighdy!
                           Misery me—lackadaydee!
He sipped no sup, and he craved no crumb,
      As he sighed for the love of a ladye!

[VERSE 2]
# APPARATUS: SHE.
I have a song to sing, O!
# APPARATUS: HE.
Sing me your song, O!
# APPARATUS: SHE.
It is sung with the ring
                        Of the song maids sing
      Who love with a love life-long, O!
It’s the song of a merrymaid, peerly proud,
Who loved a lord, and who laughed aloud
At the moan of the merryman, moping mum,
Whose soul was sore, whose glance was glum,
Who sipped no sup, and who craved no crumb,
      As he sighed for the love of a ladye!
               Heighdy! heighdy!
               Misery me—lackadaydee!
He sipped no sup, and he craved no crumb,
      As he sighed for the love of a ladye!

[VERSE 3]
# APPARATUS: HE.
I have a song to sing, O!
# APPARATUS: SHE.
Sing me your song, O!
# APPARATUS: HE.
It is sung to the knell
                     Of a churchyard bell,
      And a doleful dirge, ding dong, O!
It’s a song of a popinjay, bravely born,
Who turned up his noble nose with scorn
At the humble merrymaid, peerly proud,
Who loved that lord, and who laughed aloud
At the moan of the merryman, moping mum,
Whose soul was sad, whose glance was glum,
Who sipped no sup, and who craved no crumb,
      As he sighed for the love of a ladye!
               Heighdy! heighdy!
               Misery me—lackadaydee!
He sipped no sup, and he craved no crumb,
      As he sighed for the love of a ladye!

[VERSE 4]
# APPARATUS: SHE.
I have a song to sing, O!
# APPARATUS: HE.
Sing me your song, O!
# APPARATUS: SHE.
It is sung with a sigh
                        And a tear in the eye,
      For it tells of a righted wrong, O!
It’s a song of a merrymaid, once so gay,
Who turned on her heel and tripped away
From the peacock popinjay, bravely born,
Who turned up his noble nose with scorn
At the humble heart that he did not prize;
And it tells how she begged, with downcast eyes,
For the love of a merryman, moping mum,
Whose soul was sad, whose glance was glum,
Who sipped no sup, and who craved no crumb,
   As he sighed for the love of a ladye!
# APPARATUS: BOTH.
Heighdy! heighdy!
               Misery me—lackadaydee!
His pains were o’er, and he sighed no more.
      For he lived in the love of a ladye!

--- TITLE: A MAN WHO WOULD WOO A FAIR MAID [item: PG934-pg934-034]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 1487-1540; printed page 209)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
A MAN who would woo a fair maid,
Should ’prentice himself to the trade;
      And study all day,
      In methodical way,
How to flatter, cajole, and persuade.
He should ’prentice himself at fourteen
And practise from morning to e’en;
      And when he’s of age,
      If he will, I’ll engage,
He may capture the heart of a queen!
         It is purely a matter of skill,
         Which all may attain if they will:
            But every Jack
            He must study the knack
         If he wants to make sure of his Jill!

[VERSE 2]
If he’s made the best use of his time,
His twig he’ll so carefully lime
      That every bird
      Will come down at his word.
Whatever its plumage and clime.
He must learn that the thrill of a touch
May mean little, or nothing, or much;
      It’s an instrument rare,
      To be handled with care,
And ought to be treated as such.
         It is purely a matter of skill,
         Which all may attain if they will:
            But every Jack,
            He must study the knack
         If he wants to make sure of his Jill!

[VERSE 3]
Then a glance may be timid or free;
It will vary in mighty degree,
      From an impudent stare
      To a look of despair
That no maid without pity can see.
And a glance of despair is no guide—
It may have its ridiculous side;
      It may draw you a tear
      Or a box on the ear;
You can never be sure till you’ve tried.
         It is purely a matter of skill,
         Which all may attain if they will:
            But every Jack
            He must study the knack
         If he wants to make sure of his Jill!

--- TITLE: THE FICKLE BREEZE [item: PG934-pg934-036]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 1629-1660; printed page 219)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
SIGHING softly to the river
   Comes the loving breeze,
Setting nature all a-quiver,
   Rustling through the trees!
And the brook in rippling measure
   Laughs for very love,
While the poplars, in their pleasure,
   Wave their arms above!
         River, river, little river,
         May thy loving prosper ever.
         Heaven speed thee, poplar tree,
         May thy wooing happy be!

[VERSE 2]
Yet, the breeze is but a rover,
   When he wings away,
Brook and poplar mourn a lover!
   Sighing well-a-day!
Ah, the doing and undoing
   That the rogue could tell!
When the breeze is out a-wooing,
   Who can woo so well?
         Pretty brook, thy dream is over,
         For thy love is but a rover!
         Sad the lot of poplar trees,
         Courted by the fickle breeze!

--- TITLE: AH ME! [item: PG934-pg934-040]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 1766-1793; printed page 255)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
WHEN maiden loves, she sits and sighs,
            She wanders to and fro;
Unbidden tear-drops fill her eyes,
And to all questions she replies,
            With a sad heigho!
      ’Tis but a little word—“heigho!”
      So soft, ’tis scarcely heard—“heigho!”
            An idle breath—
            Yet life and death
      May hang upon a maid’s “heigho!”

[VERSE 2]
When maiden loves, she mopes apart,
            As owl mopes on a tree;
Although she keenly feels the smart,
She cannot tell what ails her heart,
            With its sad “Ah me!”
      ’Tis but a foolish sigh—“Ah me!”
      Born but to droop and die—“Ah me!”
            Yet all the sense
            Of eloquence
      Lies hidden in a maid’s “Ah me!”

--- TITLE: THE ÆSTHETE [item: PG934-pg934-042]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 1857-1903; printed page 271)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
IF you’re anxious for to shine in the high æsthetic line, as a man of culture rare,
You must get up all the germs of the transcendental terms, and plant them everywhere.
You must lie upon the daisies and discourse in novel phrases of your complicated state of mind
(The meaning doesn’t matter if it’s only idle chatter of a transcendental kind).
And every one will say,
               As you walk your mystic way,
               “If this young man expresses himself in terms too deep for me,
Why, what a very singularly deep young man this deep young man must be!”

[VERSE 2]
Be eloquent in praise of the very dull old days which have long since passed away,
And convince ’em, if you can, that the reign of good QUEEN ANNE was Culture’s palmiest day.
Of course you will pooh-pooh whatever’s fresh and new, and declare it’s crude and mean,
And that Art stopped short in the cultivated court of the EMPRESS JOSEPHINE.
               And every one will say,
               As you walk your mystic way,
“If that’s not good enough for him which is good enough for me,
Why, what a very cultivated kind of youth this kind of youth must be!”

[VERSE 3]
Then a sentimental passion of a vegetable fashion must excite your languid spleen,
An attachment à la Plato for a bashful young potato, or a not-too-French French bean.
Though the Philistines may jostle, you will rank as an apostle in the high æsthetic band,
If you walk down Piccadilly with a poppy or a lily in your mediæval hand.
And every one will say,
               As you walk your flowery way,
               “If he’s content with a vegetable love which would certainly not suit me,
Why, what a most particularly pure young man this pure young man must be!”

--- TITLE: BLUE BLOOD [item: PG934-pg934-047]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 2022-2055; printed page 307)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
SPURN not the nobly born
      With love affected,
Nor treat with virtuous scorn
      The well connected.
High rank involves no shame—
We boast an equal claim
With him of humble name
      To be respected!
            Blue blood!  Blue blood!
                  When virtuous love is sought,
                     Thy power is naught,
            Though dating from the Flood,
                     Blue blood!

[VERSE 2]
Spare us the bitter pain
      Of stern denials,
Nor with low-born disdain
      Augment our trials.
Hearts just as pure and fair
May beat in Belgrave Square
As in the lowly air
      Of Seven Dials!
            Blue blood!  Blue blood!
                  Of what avail art thou
                     To serve me now?
            Though dating from the Flood,
                     Blue blood!

--- TITLE: SOLATIUM [item: PG934-pg934-050]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 2137-2164; printed page 329)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
COMES the broken flower—
   Comes the cheated maid—
Though the tempest lower,
   Rain and cloud will fade!
Take, O maid, these posies:
   Though thy beauty rare
Shame the blushing roses,
   They are passing fair!
         Wear the flowers till they fade;
         Happy be thy life, O maid!

[VERSE 2]
O’er the season vernal,
   Time may cast a shade;
Sunshine, if eternal,
   Makes the roses fade:
Time may do his duty;
   Let the thief alone—
Winter hath a beauty
   That is all his own.
         Fairest days are sun and shade:
         Happy be thy life, O maid!

--- TITLE: A NIGHTMARE [item: PG934-pg934-051]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 2165-2239; printed page 335)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
WHEN you’re lying awake with a dismal headache, and repose is taboo’d by anxiety,
I conceive you may use any language you choose to indulge in without impropriety;
For your brain is on fire—the bedclothes conspire of usual slumber to plunder you:
First your counterpane goes and uncovers your toes, and your sheet slips demurely from under you;
Then the blanketing tickles—you feel like mixed pickles, so terribly sharp is the pricking,
And you’re hot, and you’re cross, and you tumble and toss till there’s nothing ’twixt you and the ticking.
Then the bedclothes all creep to the ground in a heap, and you pick ’em all up in a tangle;
Next your pillow resigns and politely declines to remain at its usual angle!
Well, you get some repose in the form of a doze, with hot eyeballs and head ever aching,
But your slumbering teems with such horrible dreams that you’d very much better be waking;
For you dream you are crossing the Channel, and tossing about in a steamer from Harwich,
Which is something between a large bathing-machine and a very small second-class carriage;
And you’re giving a treat (penny ice and cold meat) to a party of friends and relations—
They’re a ravenous horde—and they all came on board at Sloane Square and South Kensington Stations.
And bound on that journey you find your attorney (who started that morning from Devon);
He’s a bit undersized, and you don’t feel surprised when he tells you he’s only eleven.
Well, you’re driving like mad with this singular lad (by the bye the ship’s now a four-wheeler),
And you’re playing round games, and he calls you bad names when you tell him that “ties pay the dealer”;
But this you can’t stand, so you throw up your hand, and you find you’re as cold as an icicle,
In your shirt and your socks (the black silk with gold clocks), crossing Salisbury Plain on a bicycle:
And he and the crew are on bicycles too—which they’ve somehow or other invested in—
And he’s telling the tars all the particulars of a company he’s interested in—
It’s a scheme of devices, to get at low prices, all goods from cough mixtures to cables
(Which tickled the sailors) by treating retailers, as though they were all vegetables—
You get a good spadesman to plant a small tradesman (first take off his boots with a boot-tree),
And his legs will take root, and his fingers will shoot, and they’ll blossom and bud like a fruit-tree—
From the greengrocer tree you get grapes and green pea, cauliflower, pineapple, and cranberries,
While the pastry-cook plant cherry-brandy will grant—apple puffs, and three-corners, and banberries—
The shares are a penny, and ever so many are taken by ROTHSCHILD and BARING,
And just as a few are allotted to you, you awake with a shudder despairing—
You’re a regular wreck, with a crick in your neck, and no wonder you snore, for your head’s on the floor, and you’ve needles and pins from your soles to your shins, and your flesh is a-creep, for your left leg’s asleep, and you’ve cramp in your toes, and a fly on your nose, and some fluff in your lung, and a feverish tongue, and a thirst that’s intense, and a general sense that you haven’t been sleeping in clover;
But the darkness has passed, and it’s daylight at last, and the night has been long—ditto, ditto my song—and thank goodness they’re both of them over!

--- TITLE: THE MIGHTY MUST [item: PG934-pg934-055]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 2377-2408; printed page 367)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
COME mighty Must!
   Inevitable Shall!
In thee I trust.
   Time weaves my coronal!
Go mocking Is!
   Go disappointing Was!
That I am this
   Ye are the cursed cause!
Yet humble Second shall be First,
            I ween;
And dead and buried be the curst
            Has Been!

[VERSE 2]
Oh weak Might Be!
   Oh May, Might, Could, Would, Should!
How powerless ye
   For evil or for good!
In every sense
   Your moods I cheerless call,
Whate’er your tense
   Ye are Imperfect, all!
Ye have deceived the trust I’ve shown
            In ye!
Away!  The Mighty Must alone
            Shall be!

--- TITLE: THE GHOSTS’ HIGH NOON [item: PG934-pg934-057]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 2459-2487; printed page 381)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
WHEN the night wind howls in the chimney cowls, and the bat in the moonlight flies,
And inky clouds, like funeral shrouds, sail over the midnight skies—
When the footpads quail at the night-bird’s wail, and black dogs bay the moon,
Then is the spectres’ holiday—then is the ghosts’ high noon!

[VERSE 2]
As the sob of the breeze sweeps over the trees, and the mists lie low on the fen,
From grey tombstones are gathered the bones that once were women and men,
And away they go, with a mop and a mow, to the revel that ends too soon,
For cockcrow limits our holiday—the dead of the night’s high noon!

[VERSE 3]
And then each ghost with his ladye-toast to their churchyard beds take flight,
With a kiss, perhaps, on her lantern chaps, and a grisly grim “good night”;
Till the welcome knell of the midnight bell rings forth its jolliest tune,
And ushers our next high holiday—the dead of the night’s high noon!

--- TITLE: LIFE IS LOVELY ALL THE YEAR [item: PG934-pg934-060]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 2612-2655; printed page 403)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
WHEN the buds are blossoming,
Smiling welcome to the spring,
Lovers choose a wedding day—
Life is love in merry May!

[VERSE 2]
   Spring is green—Fal lal la!
      Summer’s rose—Fal lal la!
   It is sad when Summer goes,
            Fal la!
   Autumn’s gold—Fal lal la!
      Winter’s grey—Fal lal la!
   Winter still is far away—
            Fal la!
Leaves in Autumn fade and fall;
Winter is the end of all.
Spring and summer teem with glee:
Spring and summer, then, for me!
            Fal la!

[VERSE 3]
In the Spring-time seed is sown:
In the Summer grass is mown:
In the Autumn you may reap:
Winter is the time for sleep.

[VERSE 4]
   Spring is hope—Fal lal la!
      Summer’s joy—Fal lal la!
   Spring and Summer never cloy,
            Fal la!
   Autumn, toil—Fal lal la!
      Winter, rest—Fal lal la!
   Winter, after all, is best—
            Fal la!
Spring and summer pleasure you,
Autumn, ay, and winter, too—
Every season has its cheer;
Life is lovely all the year!
            Fal la!

--- TITLE: THE GREAT OAK TREE [item: PG934-pg934-062]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 2682-2726; printed page 418)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
THERE grew a little flower
            ’Neath a great oak tree:
   When the tempest ’gan to lower
            Little heeded she:
   No need had she to cower,
   For she dreaded not its power—
   She was happy in the bower
            Of her great oak tree!
                  Sing hey,
                  Lackaday!
            Let the tears fall free
For the pretty little flower and the great oak tree!

[VERSE 2]
   When she found that he was fickle,
            Was that great oak tree,
   She was in a pretty pickle,
            As she well might be—
   But his gallantries were mickle,
   For Death followed with his sickle,
   And her tears began to trickle
            For her great oak tree!
                  Sing hey,
                  Lackaday!
            Let the tears fall free
For the pretty little flower and the great oak tree!

[VERSE 3]
   Said she, “He loved me never,
            Did that great oak tree,
   But I’m neither rich nor clever,
            And so why should he?
   But though fate our fortunes sever,
   To be constant I’ll endeavour,
   Ay, for ever and for ever,
            To my great oak tree!”
                  Sing hey,
                  Lackaday!
            Let the tears fall free
For the pretty little flower and the great oak tree!

--- TITLE: SLEEP ON! [item: PG934-pg934-064]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 2784-2815; printed page 431)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
FEAR no unlicensed entry,
   Heed no bombastic talk,
While guards the British Sentry
   Pall Mall and Birdcage Walk.
Let European thunders
   Occasion no alarms,
Though diplomatic blunders
   May cause a cry “To arms!”
         Sleep on, ye pale civilians;
            All thunder-clouds defy:
         On Europe’s countless millions
            The Sentry keeps his eye!

[VERSE 2]
Should foreign-born rapscallions
   In London dare to show
Their overgrown battalions,
   Be sure I’ll let you know.
Should Russians or Norwegians
   Pollute our favoured clime
With rough barbaric legions,
   I’ll mention it in time.
         So sleep in peace, civilians,
            The Continent defy;
         While on its countless millions
            The Sentry keeps his eye!

--- TITLE: POETRY EVERYWHERE [item: PG934-pg934-066]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 2839-2865; printed page 445)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
WHAT time the poet hath hymned
The writhing maid, lithe-limbed,
   Quivering on amaranthine asphodel,
How can he paint her woes,
Knowing, as well he knows,
   That all can be set right with calomel?

[VERSE 2]
When from the poet’s plinth
The amorous colocynth
   Yearns for the aloe, faint with rapturous thrills,
How can he hymn their throes
Knowing, as well he knows,
   That they are only uncompounded pills?

[VERSE 3]
Is it, and can it be,
Nature hath this decree,
   Nothing poetic in the world shall dwell?
Or that in all her works
Something poetic lurks,
   Even in colocynth and calomel?

--- TITLE: HE LOVES! [item: PG934-pg934-067]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 2866-2887; printed page 453)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
HE loves!  If in the bygone years
   Thine eyes have ever shed
Tears—bitter, unavailing tears,
   For one untimely dead—
If in the eventide of life
   Sad thoughts of her arise,
Then let the memory of thy wife
   Plead for my boy—he dies!

[VERSE 2]
He dies!  If fondly laid aside
   In some old cabinet,
Memorials of thy long-dead bride
   Lie, dearly treasured yet,
Then let her hallowed bridal dress—
   Her little dainty gloves—
Her withered flowers—her faded tress—
   Plead for my boy—he loves!

--- TITLE: MY LADY [item: PG934-pg934-070]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 2955-2990; printed page 471)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
BEDECKED in fashion trim,
      With every curl a-quiver;
Or leaping, light of limb,
      O’er rivulet and river;
Or skipping o’er the lea
      On daffodil and daisy;
Or stretched beneath a tree,
      All languishing and lazy;
            Whatever be her mood—
            Be she demurely prude
                  Or languishingly lazy—
                  My lady drives me crazy!
            In vain her heart is wooed,
            Whatever be her mood!

[VERSE 2]
What profit should I gain
      Suppose she loved me dearly?
Her coldness turns my brain
      To verge of madness merely.
Her kiss—though, Heaven knows,
      To dream of it were treason—
Would tend, as I suppose,
      To utter loss of reason!
            My state is not amiss;
            I would not have a kiss
                  Which, in or out of season,
                  Might tend to loss of reason:
            What profit in such bliss?
            A fig for such a kiss!

--- TITLE: ONE AGAINST THE WORLD [item: PG934-pg934-071]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 2991-3034; printed page 473)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
IT’S my opinion—though I own
In thinking so I’m quite alone—
      In some respects I’m but a fright.
You like my features, I suppose?
I’m disappointed with my nose:
      Some rave about it—perhaps they’re right.
My figure just sets off a fit;
But when they say it’s exquisite
      (And they do say so), that’s too strong.
I hope I’m not what people call
Opinionated!  After all,
      I’m but a goose, and may be wrong!

[VERSE 2]
When charms enthral
   There’s some excuse
      For measures strong;
And after all
   I’m but a goose,
      And may be wrong!
My teeth are very neat, no doubt;
But after all they may fall out:
      I think they will—some think they won’t.
My hands are small, as you may see,
But not as small as they might be,
      At least, I think so—others don’t.
But there, a girl may preach and prate
From morning six to evening eight,
      And never stop to dine,
When all the world, although misled,
Is quite agreed on any head—
      And it is quite agreed on mine!
All said and done,
   It’s little I
      Against a throng.
I’m only one,
   And possibly
      I may be wrong!

--- TITLE: PUT A PENNY IN THE SLOT [item: PG934-pg934-072]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 3035-3072; printed page 480)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
IF my action’s stiff and crude,
Do not laugh, because it’s rude.
If my gestures promise larks,
Do not make unkind remarks.
Clockwork figures may be found
Everywhere and all around.
Ten to one, if I but knew,
You are clockwork figures too.
And the motto of the lot,
“Put a penny in the slot!”
Usurer, for money lent,
Making out his cent per cent—
Widow plump or maiden rare,
Deaf and dumb to suitor’s prayer—
Tax collectors, whom in vain
You implore to “call again”—
Cautious voter, whom you find
Slow in making up his mind—
If you’d move them on the spot,
Put a penny in the slot!

[VERSE 2]
Bland reporters in the courts,
Who suppress police reports—
Sheriff’s yeoman, pen in fist,
Making out a jury list—
Stern policemen, tall and spare,
Acting all “upon the square”—
(Which in words that plainer fall,
Means that you can square them all)—
If you want to move the lot,
Put a penny in the slot!

--- TITLE: GOOD LITTLE GIRLS [item: PG934-pg934-073]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 3073-3121; printed page 482)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
ALTHOUGH of native maids the cream,
We’re brought up on the English scheme—
      The best of all
      For great and small
            Who modesty adore.
For English girls are good as gold,
Extremely modest (so we’re told),
Demurely coy—divinely cold—
            And we are that—and more.
To please papa, who argues thus—
All girls should mould themselves on us,
      Because we are,
      By furlongs far,
            The best of all the bunch;
We show ourselves to loud applause
From ten to four without a pause—
Which is an awkward time because
            It cuts into our lunch.

[VERSE 2]
Oh, maids of high and low degree,
Whose social code is rather free,
Please look at us and you will see
What good young ladies ought to be!

[VERSE 3]
And as we stand, like clockwork toys,
A lecturer papa employs
      To puff and praise
      Our modest ways
            And guileless character—
Our well-known blush—our downcast eyes—
Our famous look of mild surprise
(Which competition still defies)—
            Our celebrated “Sir!!!”
Then all the crowd take down our looks
In pocket memorandum books.
      To diagnose,
      Our modest pose
            The kodaks do their best:
If evidence you would possess
Of what is maiden bashfulness,
You only need a button press—
            And we do all the rest.

--- TITLE: LIFE [item: PG934-pg934-074]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 3122-3195; printed page 487)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
FIRST you’re born—and I’ll be bound you
Find a dozen strangers round you.
“Hallo,” cries the new-born baby,
“Where’s my parents? which may they be?”
      Awkward silence—no reply—
      Puzzled baby wonders why!
Father rises, bows politely—
Mother smiles (but not too brightly)—
Doctor mumbles like a dumb thing—
Nurse is busy mixing something.—
      Every symptom tends to show
      You’re decidedly de trop—
                  Ho! ho! ho! ho! ho! he! ho! ho!
                        Time’s teetotum,
                           If you spin it,
                        Give its quotum
                           Once a minute:
                        I’ll go bail
                        You hit the nail,
                        And if you fail
                           The deuce is in it!

[VERSE 2]
You grow up, and you discover
What it is to be a lover.
Some young lady is selected—
Poor, perhaps, but well-connected,
      Whom you hail (for Love is blind)
      As the Queen of Fairy-kind.
Though she’s plain—perhaps unsightly,
Makes her face up—laces tightly,
In her form your fancy traces
All the gifts of all the graces.
      Rivals none the maiden woo,
      So you take her and she takes you!
                  Ho! ho! ho! ho! ho! ho! ho! ho!
                        Joke beginning,
                           Never ceases,
                        Till your inning
                           Time releases;
                        On your way
                        You blindly stray,
                        And day by day
                           The joke increases!
Ten years later—Time progresses—
Sours your temper—thins your tresses;
Fancy, then, her chain relaxes;
Rates are facts and so are taxes.
      Fairy Queen’s no longer young—
      Fairy Queen has such a tongue!
Twins have probably intruded—
Quite unbidden—just as you did;
They’re a source of care and trouble—
Just as you were—only double.
      Comes at last the final stroke—
      Time has had his little joke!
                  Ho! ho! ho! ho! ho! ho! ho! ho!
                        Daily driven
                           (Wife as drover)
                        Ill you’ve thriven—
                           Ne’er in clover:
                        Lastly, when
                        Threescore and ten
                        (And not till then),
                           The joke is over!
Ho! ho! ho! ho! ho! ho! ho! ho!
      Then—and then
            The joke is over!

--- TITLE: LIMITED LIABILITY [item: PG934-pg934-075]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 3196-3246; printed page 490)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
SOME seven men form an Association
      (If possible, all Peers and Baronets),
They start off with a public declaration
      To what extent they mean to pay their debts.
That’s called their Capital: if they are wary
      They will not quote it at a sum immense.
The figure’s immaterial—it may vary
      From eighteen million down to eighteenpence.
            I should put it rather low;
            The good sense of doing so
      Will be evident at once to any debtor.
            When it’s left to you to say
            What amount you mean to pay,
      Why, the lower you can put it at, the better.

[VERSE 2]
They then proceed to trade with all who’ll trust ’em,
      Quite irrespective of their capital
(It’s shady, but it’s sanctified by custom);
      Bank, Railway, Loan, or Panama Canal.
You can’t embark on trading too tremendous—
      It’s strictly fair, and based on common sense—
If you succeed, your profits are stupendous—
      And if you fail, pop goes your eighteenpence.
            Make the money-spinner spin!
            For you only stand to win,
      And you’ll never with dishonesty be twitted.
            For nobody can know,
            To a million or so,
      To what extent your capital’s committed!

[VERSE 3]
If you come to grief, and creditors are craving
      (For nothing that is planned by mortal head
Is certain in this Vale of Sorrow—saving
      That one’s Liability is Limited),—
Do you suppose that signifies perdition?
      If so you’re but a monetary dunce—
You merely file a Winding-Up Petition,
      And start another Company at once!
            Though a Rothschild you may be
            In your own capacity,
      As a Company you’ve come to utter sorrow—
            But the Liquidators say,
            “Never mind—you needn’t pay,”
      So you start another Company to-morrow!

--- TITLE: ANGLICISED UTOPIA [item: PG934-pg934-076]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 3247-3303; printed page 497)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
SOCIETY has quite forsaken all her wicked courses,
Which empties our police courts, and abolishes divorces.
            (Divorce is nearly obsolete in England.)
No tolerance we show to undeserving rank and splendour;
For the higher his position is, the greater the offender.
            (That’s a maxim that is prevalent in England.)
No Peeress at our Drawing-Room before the Presence passes
Who wouldn’t be accepted by the lower-middle classes;
Each shady dame, whatever be her rank, is bowed out neatly.
In short, this happy country has been Anglicised completely!
         It really is surprising
         What a thorough Anglicising
      We’ve brought about—Utopia’s quite another land;
         In her enterprising movements,
         She is England—with improvements,
      Which we dutifully offer to our mother-land!

[VERSE 2]
Our city we have beautified—we’ve done it willy-nilly—
And all that isn’t Belgrave Square is Strand and Piccadilly.
            (They haven’t any slummeries in England.)
We have solved the labour question with discrimination polished,
So poverty is obsolete and hunger is abolished—
            (They are going to abolish it in England.)
The Chamberlain our native stage has purged, beyond a question,
Of “risky” situation and indelicate suggestion;
No piece is tolerated if it’s costumed indiscreetly—
In short, this happy country has been Anglicised completely!
         It really is surprising
         What a thorough Anglicising
      We’ve brought about—Utopia’s quite another land;
         In her enterprising movements,
         She is England—with improvements,
      Which we dutifully offer to our mother-land!
Our Peerage we’ve remodelled on an intellectual basis,
Which certainly is rough on our hereditary races—
            (They are going to remodel it in England.)
The Brewers and the Cotton Lords no longer seek admission,
And Literary Merit meets with proper recognition—
            (As Literary Merit does in England!)
Who knows but we may count among our intellectual chickens
Like them an Earl of Thackeray and p’raps a Duke of Dickens—
Lord Fildes and Viscount Millais (when they come) we’ll welcome sweetly—
And then, this happy country will be Anglicised completely!
         It really is surprising
         What a thorough Anglicising
      We’ve brought about—Utopia’s quite another land;
         In her enterprising movements,
         She is England—with improvements,
      Which we dutifully offer to our mother-land!

--- TITLE: AN ENGLISH GIRL [item: PG934-pg934-077]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 3304-3360; printed page 499)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
A WONDERFUL joy our eyes to bless,
   In her magnificent comeliness,
   Is an English girl of eleven stone two,
   And five foot ten in her dancing shoe!
            She follows the hounds, and on she pounds—
               The “field” tails off and the muffs diminish—
            Over the hedges and brooks she bounds—
               Straight as a crow, from find to finish.
            At cricket, her kin will lose or win—
               She and her maids, on grass and clover,
            Eleven maids out—eleven maids in—
               (And perhaps an occasional “maiden over”).
Go search the world and search the sea,
Then come you home and sing with me
There’s no such gold and no such pearl
As a bright and beautiful English girl!

[VERSE 2]
   With a ten-mile spin she stretches her limbs,
   She golfs, she punts, she rows, she swims—
   She plays, she sings, she dances, too,
   From ten or eleven till all is blue!
            At ball or drum, till small hours come
               (Chaperon’s fan conceals her yawning),
            She’ll waltz away like a teetotum,
               And never go home till daylight’s dawning.
            Lawn tennis may share her favours fair—
               Her eyes a-dance and her cheeks a-glowing—
            Down comes her hair, but what does she care?
               It’s all her own and it’s worth the showing!
Go search the world and search the sea,
Then come you home and sing with me
There’s no such gold and no such pearl
As a bright and beautiful English girl!

[VERSE 3]
   Her soul is sweet as the ocean air,
   For prudery knows no haven there;
   To find mock-modesty, please apply
   To the conscious blush and the downcast eye.
            Rich in the things contentment brings,
               In every pure enjoyment wealthy,
            Blithe as a beautiful bird she sings,
               For body and mind are hale and healthy.
            Her eyes they thrill with right goodwill—
               Her heart is light as a floating feather—
            As pure and bright as the mountain rill
               That leaps and laughs in the Highland heather!
Go search the world and search the sea,
Then come you home and sing with me
There’s no such gold and no such pearl
As a bright and beautiful English girl!

--- TITLE: A MANAGER’S PERPLEXITIES [item: PG934-pg934-078]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 3361-3397; printed page 504)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
WERE I a king in very truth,
      And had a son—a guileless youth—
            In probable succession;
      To teach him patience, teach him tact,
      How promptly in a fix to act,
      He should adopt, in point of fact,
            A manager’s profession.
      To that condition he should stoop
            (Despite a too fond mother),
      With eight or ten “stars” in his troupe,
            All jealous of each other!
Oh, the man who can rule a theatrical crew,
Each member a genius (and some of them two),
And manage to humour them, little and great,
Can govern a tuppenny-ha’penny State!

[VERSE 2]
      Both A and B rehearsal slight—
      They say they’ll be “all right at night”
            (They’ve both to go to school yet);
      C in each act must change her dress,
      D will attempt to “square the press”;
      E won’t play Romeo unless
            His grandmother plays Juliet;
      F claims all hoydens as her rights
            (She’s played them thirty seasons);
      And G must show herself in tights
            For two convincing reasons—
            Two very well-shaped reasons!
Oh, the man who can drive a theatrical team,
With wheelers and leaders in order supreme,
Can govern and rule, with a wave of his fin,
All Europe and Asia—with Ireland thrown in!

--- TITLE: OUT OF SORTS [item: PG934-pg934-079]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 3398-3439; printed page 506)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
WHEN you find you’re a broken-down critter,
Who is all of a trimmle and twitter,
With your palate unpleasantly bitter,
      As if you’d just bitten a pill—
When your legs are as thin as dividers,
And you’re plagued with unruly insiders,
And your spine is all creepy with spiders,
      And you’re highly gamboge in the gill—
When you’ve got a beehive in your head,
      And a sewing machine in each ear,
And you feel that you’ve eaten your bed,
      And you’ve got a bad headache down here—
            When such facts are about,
                  And these symptoms you find
                     In your body or crown—
            Well, it’s time to look out,
                  You may make up your mind
                     You had better lie down!

[VERSE 2]
When your lips are all smeary—like tallow,
And your tongue is decidedly yallow,
With a pint of warm oil in your swallow,
      And a pound of tin-tacks in your chest—
When you’re down in the mouth with the vapours,
And all over your new Morris papers
Black-beetles are cutting their capers,
      And crawly things never at rest—
When you doubt if your head is your own,
      And you jump when an open door slams—
Then you’ve got to a state which is known
      To the medical world as “jim-jams.”
            If such symptoms you find
                  In your body or head,
                     They’re not easy to quell—
            You may make up your mind
                  You are better in bed,
                     For you’re not at all well!

--- TITLE: HOW IT’S DONE [item: PG934-pg934-080]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 3440-3514; printed page 512)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
Bold-faced ranger
      (Perfect stranger)
Meets two well-behaved young ladies
      He’s attractive,
      Young and active—
Each a little bit afraid is.
      Youth advances,
      At his glances
To their danger they awaken;
      They repel him
      As they tell him
He is very much mistaken.
Though they speak to him politely,
Please observe they’re sneering slightly,
Just to show he’s acting vainly.
This is Virtue saying plainly,
      “Go away, young bachelor,
      We are not what you take us for!”
(When addressed impertinently,
English ladies answer gently,
      “Go away, young bachelor,
      We are not what you take us for!”)

[VERSE 2]
      As he gazes,
      Hat he raises,
Enters into conversation.
      Makes excuses—
      This produces
Interesting agitation.
      He, with daring,
      Undespairing,
Gives his card—his rank discloses—
      Little heeding
      This proceeding,
They turn up their little noses.
Pray observe this lesson vital—
When a man of rank and title
His position first discloses,
Always cock your little noses.
      When at home, let all the class
      Try this in the looking-glass.
(English girls of well-bred notions
Shun all unrehearsed emotions,
      English girls of highest class
      Practise them before the glass.)

[VERSE 3]
      His intentions
      Then he mentions,
Something definite to go on—
      Makes recitals
      Of his titles,
Hints at settlements, and so on.
      Smiling sweetly,
      They, discreetly,
Ask for further evidences:
      Thus invited,
      He, delighted,
Gives the usual references.
This is business.  Each is fluttered
When the offer’s fairly uttered.
“Which of them has his affection?”
He declines to make selection.
      Do they quarrel for his dross?
      Not a bit of it—they toss!
Please observe this cogent moral—
English ladies never quarrel.
      When a doubt they come across,
      English ladies always toss.

--- TITLE: A CLASSICAL REVIVAL [item: PG934-pg934-081]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 3515-3588; printed page 515)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
AT the outset I may mention it’s my sovereign intention
   To revive the classic memories of Athens at its best,
For my company possesses all the necessary dresses,
   And a course of quiet cramming will supply us with the rest.
We’ve a choir hyporchematic (that is, ballet-operatic)
   Who respond to the choreutae of that cultivated age,
And our clever chorus-master, all but captious criticaster,
   Would accept as the choregus of the early Attic stage.
This return to classic ages is considered in their wages,
   Which are always calculated by the day or by the week—
And I’ll pay ’em (if they’ll back me) all in oboloi and drachmae,
   Which they’ll get (if they prefer it) at the Kalends that are Greek!

[VERSE 2]
   (At this juncture I may mention
      That this erudition sham
   Is but classical pretension,
      The result of steady “cram.”:
   Periphrastic methods spurning,
   To my readers all discerning
   I admit this show of learning
      Is the fruit of steady “cram.”!)

[VERSE 3]
In the period Socratic every dining-room was Attic
   (Which suggests an architecture of a topsy-turvy kind),
There they’d satisfy their twist on a recherché cold ἄριστον,
   Which is what they called their lunch—and so may you, if you’re inclined.
As they gradually got on, they’d πρέπεσθαι πρὸς τὸν πότον
   (Which is Attic for a steady and a conscientious drink).
But they mixed their wine with water—which I’m sure they didn’t oughter—
   And we Anglo-Saxons know a trick worth two of that, I think!
Then came rather risky dances (under certain circumstances)
   Which would shock that worthy gentleman, the Licenser of Plays,
Corybantian maniac kick—Dionysiac or Bacchic—
   And the Dithyrambic revels of those indecorous days.

[VERSE 4]
   (And perhaps I’d better mention
      Lest alarming you I am,
   That it isn’t our intention
      To perform a Dithyramb—
   It displays a lot of stocking,
   Which is always very shocking,
   And of course I’m only mocking
      At the prevalence of “cram.”)

[VERSE 5]
Yes, on reconsideration, there are customs of that nation
   Which are not in strict accordance with the habits of our day,
And when I come to codify, their rules I mean to modify,
   Or Mrs. Grundy, p’r’aps, may have a word or two to say:
For they hadn’t macintoshes or umbrellas or goloshes—
   And a shower with their dresses must have played the very deuce,
And it must have been unpleasing when they caught a fit of sneezing,
   For, it seems, of pocket-handkerchiefs they didn’t know the use.
They wore little underclothing—scarcely anything—or no-thing—
   And their dress of Coan silk was quite transparent in design—
Well, in fact, in summer weather, something like the “altogether.”
   And it’s there, I rather fancy, I shall have to draw the line!
   (And again I wish to mention
      That this erudition sham
   Is but classical pretension,
      The result of steady “cram.”
   Yet my classic love aggressive,
   If you’ll pardon the possessive,
   Is exceedingly impressive
      When you’re passing an exam.)

--- TITLE: THE PRACTICAL JOKER [item: PG934-pg934-082]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 3589-3646; printed page 523)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
OH what a fund of joy jocund lies hid in harmless hoaxes!
         What keen enjoyment springs
         From cheap and simple things!
What deep delight from sources trite inventive humour coaxes,
         That pain and trouble brew
         For every one but you!
Gunpowder placed inside its waist improves a mild Havanah,
         Its unexpected flash
         Burns eyebrows and moustache;
When people dine no kind of wine beats ipecacuanha,
         But common sense suggests
         You keep it for your guests—
Then naught annoys the organ boys like throwing red-hot coppers,
         And much amusement bides
         In common butter-slides.
And stringy snares across the stairs cause unexpected croppers.
         Coal scuttles, recollect,
         Produce the same effect.
            A man possessed
               Of common sense
            Need not invest
               At great expense—
            It does not call
               For pocket deep,
            These jokes are all
               Extremely cheap.
If you commence with eighteenpence (it’s all you’ll have to pay),
You may command a pleasant and a most instructive day.

[VERSE 2]
A good spring gun breeds endless fun, and makes men jump like rockets,
         And turnip-heads on posts
         Make very decent ghosts:
Then hornets sting like anything, when placed in waist-coat pockets—
         Burnt cork and walnut juice
         Are not without their use.
No fun compares with easy chairs whose seats are stuffed with needles—
Live shrimps their patience tax
When put down people’s backs—
Surprising, too, what one can do with fifty fat black beedles—
         And treacle on a chair
         Will make a Quaker swear!
            Then sharp tin tacks
               And pocket squirts—
            And cobblers’ wax
               For ladies’ skirts—
            And slimy slugs
               On bedroom floors—
            And water jugs
               On open doors—
Prepared with these cheap properties, amusing tricks to play,
Upon a friend a man may spend a most delightful day!

--- TITLE: THE NATIONAL ANTHEM [item: PG934-pg934-083]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 3647-3686; printed page 526)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
A MONARCH is pestered with cares,
      Though, no doubt, he can often trepan them;
But one comes in a shape he can never escape—
      The implacable National Anthem!
            Though for quiet and rest he may yearn,
            It pursues him at every turn—
                  No chance of forsaking
                     Its rococo numbers;
                  They haunt him when waking—
                     They poison his slumbers—
Like the Banbury Lady, whom every one knows,
He’s cursed with its music wherever he goes!
      Though its words but imperfectly rhyme,
            And the devil himself couldn’t scan them;
      With composure polite he endures day and night
            That illiterate National Anthem!

[VERSE 2]
It serves a good purpose, I own:
      Its strains are devout and impressive—
Its heart-stirring notes raise a lump in our throats
      As we burn with devotion excessive:
            But the King, who’s been bored by that song
            From his cradle—each day—all day long—
                  Who’s heard it loud-shouted
                     By throats operatic,
                  And loyally spouted
                     By courtiers emphatic—
By soldier—by sailor—by drum and by fife—
Small blame if he thinks it the plague of his life!
      While his subjects sing loudly and long,
            Their King—who would willingly ban them—
      Sits, worry disguising, anathematising
            That Bogie, the National Anthem!

--- TITLE: HER TERMS [item: PG934-pg934-084]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 3687-3744; printed page 534)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
MY wedded life
            Must every pleasure bring
                  On scale extensive!
      If I’m your wife
            I must have everything
                  That’s most expensive—
      A lady’s-maid—
            (My hair alone to do
                  I am not able)—
      And I’m afraid
            I’ve been accustomed to
                  A first-rate table.
These things one must consider when one marries—
And everything I wear must come from Paris!
                     Oh, think of that!
                     Oh, think of that!
I can’t wear anything that’s not from Paris!
      From top to toes
            Quite Frenchified I am,
                  If you examine.
      And then—who knows?—
            Perhaps some day a fam—
                  Perhaps a famine!
My argument’s correct, if you examine,
What should we do, if there should come a f-famine!

[VERSE 2]
      Though in green pea
            Yourself you needn’t stint
                  In July sunny,
      In Januaree
            It really costs a mint—
                  A mint of money!
      No lamb for us—
            House lamb at Christmas sells
                  At prices handsome:
      Asparagus,
            In winter, parallels
                  A Monarch’s ransom:
When purse to bread and butter barely reaches,
What is your wife to do for hot-house peaches?
                     Ah! tell me that!
                     Ah! tell me that!
What is your wife to do for hot-house peaches?
      Your heart and hand
            Though at my feet you lay,
                  All others scorning!
      As matters stand,
            There’s nothing now to say
                  Except—good morning!
Though virtue be a husband’s best adorning,
That won’t pay rates and taxes—so, good morning!

--- TITLE: THE INDEPENDENT BEE [item: PG934-pg934-085]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 3745-3808; printed page 536)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
A HIVE of bees, as I’ve heard say,
Said to their Queen one sultry day,
      “Please your Majesty’s high position,
            The hive is full and the weather is warm,
      We rather think, with a due submission,
            The time has come when we ought to swarm.”
                  Buzz, buzz, buzz, buzz.
Up spake their Queen and thus spake she—
“This is a matter that rests with me,
Who dares opinions thus to form?
I’ll tell you when it is time to swarm!”
      Buzz, buzz, buzz, buzz.

[VERSE 2]
Her Majesty wore an angry frown,
In fact, her Majesty’s foot was down—
Her Majesty sulked—declined to sup—
In short, her Majesty’s back was up.
      Buzz, buzz, buzz, buzz.
Her foot was down and her back was up!

[VERSE 3]
That hive contained one obstinate bee
(His name was Peter), and thus spake he—
      “Though every bee has shown white feather,
               To bow to tyranny I’m not prone—
      Why should a hive swarm all together?
               Surely a bee can swarm alone?”
                        Buzz, buzz, buzz, buzz.
               Upside down and inside out,
               Backwards, forwards, round about,
               Twirling here and twisting there,
               Topsy turvily everywhere—
                        Buzz, buzz, buzz, buzz.
               Pitiful sight it was to see
               Respectable elderly high-class bee,
               Who kicked the beam at sixteen stone,
               Trying his best to swarm alone!
                        Buzz, buzz, buzz, buzz.
               Trying his best to swarm alone!

[VERSE 4]
The hive were shocked to see their chum
(A strict teetotaller) teetotum—
      The Queen exclaimed, “How terrible, very!
            It’s perfectly clear to all the throng
      Peter’s been at the old brown sherry.
            Old brown sherry is much too strong—
                  Buzz, buzz, buzz, buzz.
Of all who thus themselves degrade,
A stern example must be made,
To Coventry go, you tipsy bee!”
So off to Coventry town went he.
      Buzz, buzz, buzz, buzz.
There, classed with all who misbehave,
Both plausible rogue and noisome knave,
In dismal dumps he lived to own
The folly of trying to swarm alone!
      Buzz, buzz, buzz, buzz.
All came of trying to swarm alone.

--- TITLE: THE DISCONCERTED TENOR [item: PG934-pg934-086]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 3809-3848; printed page 547)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
A TENOR, all singers above
      (This doesn’t admit of a question),
            Should keep himself quiet,
            Attend to his diet,
      And carefully nurse his digestion.
But when he is madly in love,
      It’s certain to tell on his singing—
            You can’t do chromatics
            With proper emphatics
      When anguish your bosom is wringing!
When distracted with worries in plenty,
And his pulse is a hundred and twenty,
And his fluttering bosom the slave of mistrust is,
      A tenor can’t do himself justice.
            Now observe—(sings a high note)—
      You see, I can’t do myself justice!

[VERSE 2]
I could sing, if my fervour were mock,
      It’s easy enough if you’re acting,
            But when one’s emotion
            Is born of devotion,
      You mustn’t be over-exacting.
One ought to be firm as a rock
      To venture a shake in vibrato;
            When fervour’s expected,
            Keep cool and collected,
      Or never attempt agitato.
But, of course, when his tongue is of leather,
And his lips appear pasted together,
And his sensitive palate as dry as a crust is,
      A tenor can’t do himself justice.
            Now observe—(sings a cadence)—
      It’s no use—I can’t do myself justice!

--- TITLE: THE PLAYED-OUT HUMORIST [item: PG934-pg934-087]
--- SOURCE: PG934 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/934.txt.utf-8 (physical lines 3849-3893; printed page 553)
--- AUTHOR: W. S. Gilbert

[VERSE 1]
QUIXOTIC is his enterprise, and hopeless his adventure is,
   Who seeks for jocularities that haven’t yet been said.
The world has joked incessantly for over fifty centuries,
   And every joke that’s possible has long ago been made.
I started as a humorist with lots of mental fizziness,
   But humour is a drug which it’s the fashion to abuse;
For my stock-in-trade, my fixtures, and the goodwill of the business
   No reasonable offer I am likely to refuse.
            And if anybody choose
            He may circulate the news
   That no reasonable offer I’m likely to refuse.

[VERSE 2]
Oh happy was that humorist—the first that made a pun at all—
   Who when a joke occurred to him, however poor and mean,
Was absolutely certain that it never had been done at all—
   How popular at dinners must that humorist have been!

[VERSE 3]
Oh the days when some stepfather for the query held a handle out,
   The door-mat from the scraper, is it distant very far?
And when no one knew where Moses was when Aaron blew the candle out,
   And no one had discovered that a door could be a-jar!
            But your modern hearers are
            In their tastes particular,
   And they sneer if you inform them that a door can be a-jar!

[VERSE 4]
In search of quip and quiddity, I’ve sat all day, alone, apart—
   And all that I could hit on as a problem was—to find
Analogy between a scrag of mutton and a Bony-part,
   Which offers slight employment to the speculative mind:
For you cannot call it very good, however great your charity—
   It’s not the sort of humour that is greeted with a shout—
And I’ve come to the conclusion that my mine of jocularity
   In present Anno Domini, is worked completely out!
            Though the notion you may scout,
            I can prove beyond a doubt
   That my mine of jocularity is utterly worked out.
