# author: Edmund Clarence Stedman
# region: american
# source: GITenberg/The-Golden-Treasury-of-American-Songs-and-Lyrics_15553 15553.txt md5 a3b03513163c9554badc67b59db41a79 (Tier-1 concurrent load 2026-08-20)
# licence: public domain - Project Gutenberg; title page MDCCCXCIX (L.C. Page, Boston); edition published 1899 -- The Golden Treasury of American Songs and Lyrics, ed. F. L. Knowles
# source: GITenberg/American-War-Ballads-and-Lyrics-Volume-2-of-2-A-Collection-of-the-Songs-and-Ballads-of-the-Co__54211 54211-0.txt md5 30abc6753b3a24cffb9ef94adf54ecf7 (Tier-1 concurrent load 2026-08-20)
# licence: public domain - Project Gutenberg; edition published 1889 -- American War Ballads and Lyrics, Vol. 2, ed. G. C. Eggleston
# source: GITenberg/Poems-of-American-History_47476 47476-8.txt md5 8066e20ffa0ea5545750e0c8b92a34ac (Phase-1 concurrent load 2026-08-20)
# licence: public domain - Project Gutenberg; 'COPYRIGHT, 1908 AND 1922, BY BURTON EGBERT STEVENSON'; edition published 1922 -- Poems of American History, ed. B. E. Stevenson
# source: GITenberg/The-Home-Book-of-Verse---Volume-1_2619 2619.txt md5 cc5e9f7b88436840e62b5ae53ca193e8 (Phase-1 concurrent load 2026-08-20)
# licence: public domain -- author d. 1908, as this edition's own printed credit gives it; NO claim is made about the edition date: the PG text is a 1930s printing naming no source edition (it credits authors dead as late as 1936 and prints 'Ford Madox Ford' against its own index's 'Hueffer'), so this item rests on its author being long dead and not on the impression -- The Home Book of Verse, ed. B. E. Stevenson, vol. 1
# source: GITenberg/The-Home-Book-of-Verse---Volume-2_2620 2620.txt md5 2ebb72a03c928eacc355203b2386597f (Phase-1 concurrent load 2026-08-20)
# licence: public domain -- author d. 1908, as this edition's own printed credit gives it; NO claim is made about the edition date: the PG text is a 1930s printing naming no source edition (it credits authors dead as late as 1936 and prints 'Ford Madox Ford' against its own index's 'Hueffer'), so this item rests on its author being long dead and not on the impression -- The Home Book of Verse, ed. B. E. Stevenson, vol. 2
# source: GITenberg/The-Home-Book-of-Verse---Volume-4_2622 2622.txt md5 3c040b48ba2ce137aaacafba83480ec9 (Phase-1 concurrent load 2026-08-20)
# licence: public domain -- author d. 1908, as this edition's own printed credit gives it; NO claim is made about the edition date: the PG text is a 1930s printing naming no source edition (it credits authors dead as late as 1936 and prints 'Ford Madox Ford' against its own index's 'Hueffer'), so this item rests on its author being long dead and not on the impression -- The Home Book of Verse, ed. B. E. Stevenson, vol. 4
# attribution: the edition's own trailing author credit after each poem
# structure: [VERSE n] / [CHORUS] / [REFRAIN] as printed; 'AIR--"X"' lines hoisted into the TITLE line as [air: X]
# stripped: footnote markers and bodies, page numbers, editorial prose, illustration captions
# songs: 22

--- TITLE: KEARNEY AT SEVEN PINES
--- SOURCE: PG54211
[VERSE 1]
So that soldierly legend is still on its journey--
  That story of Kearney who knew not to yield!
’Twas the day when with Jameson, fierce Berry, and Birney,
Against twenty thousand he rallied the field.
  Where the red volleys poured, where the clamor rose highest,
Where the dead lay in clumps through the dwarf oak and pine,
  Where the aim from the thicket was surest and nighest,
No charge like Phil Kearney’s along the whole line.
[VERSE 2]
When the battle went ill, and the bravest were solemn,
  Near the dark Seven Pines, where we still held our ground,
He rode down the length of the withering column,
  And his heart at our war-cry leapt up with a bound.
He snuffed, like his charger, the wind of the powder,--
  His sword waved us on, and we answered the sign;
Loud our cheer as we rushed, but his laugh rang the louder:
  “There’s the devil’s own fun, boys, along the whole line!”
[VERSE 3]
How he strode his brown steed! How we saw his blade brighten
  In the one hand still left--and the reins in his teeth!
He laughed like a boy when the holidays heighten,
  But a soldier’s glance shot from his visor beneath.
Up came the reserves to the mellay infernal,
  Asking where to go in--through the clearing or pine?
“Oh, anywhere! Forward! ’Tis all the same, Colonel:
  You’ll find lovely fighting along the whole line!”
[VERSE 4]
Oh, evil the black shroud of night at Chantilly,
  That hid him from sight of his brave men and tried!
Foul, foul sped the bullet that clipped the white lily,
  The flower of our knighthood, the whole army’s pride!
Yet we dream that he still--in that shadowy region
  Where the dead form their ranks at the wan drummer’s sign--
Rides on, as of old, down the length of his legion,
  And the word still is Forward! along the whole line.

--- TITLE: WANTED--A MAN
--- SOURCE: PG54211
[VERSE 1]
Back from the trebly crimsoned field
  Terrible words are thunder-tost;
Full of the wrath that will not yield,
  Full of revenge for battles lost!
Hark to their echo, as it crost
  The Capital, making faces wan:
“End this murderous holocaust;
  Abraham Lincoln, give us a MAN!
[VERSE 2]
“Give us a man of God’s own mould,
  Born to marshal his fellow-men;
One whose fame is not bought and sold
  At the stroke of a politician’s pen;
Give us the man of thousands ten,
  Fit to do as well as to plan;
Give us a rallying-cry, and then,
  Abraham Lincoln, give us a MAN!
[VERSE 3]
“No leader to shirk the boasting foe,
  And to march and countermarch our brave,
Till they fall like ghosts in the marshes low,
  And swamp-grass covers each nameless grave;
Nor another, whose fatal banners wave
  Aye in disaster’s shameful van;
Nor another, to bluster, and lie, and rave,--
  Abraham Lincoln, give us a MAN!
[VERSE 4]
“Hearts are mourning in the North,
  While the sister rivers seek the main,
Red with our life-blood flowing forth--
  Who shall gather it up again?
Though we march to the battle-plain
  Firmly as when the strife began,
Shall all our offering be in vain?--
  Abraham Lincoln, give us a MAN!
[VERSE 5]
“Is there never one in all the land,
  One on whose might the Cause may lean?
Are all the common ones so grand,
  And all the titled ones so mean?
What if your failure may have been
  In trying to make good bread from bran,
From worthless metal a weapon keen?--
  Abraham Lincoln, find us a MAN!
[VERSE 6]
“Oh, we will follow him to the death,
  Where the foeman’s fiercest columns are!
Oh, we will use our latest breath,
  Cheering for every sacred star!
His to marshal us high and far;
  Ours to battle, as patriots can
When a hero leads the Holy War!--
  Abraham Lincoln, give us a MAN!”

--- TITLE: TREASON’S LAST DEVICE
--- SOURCE: PG54211
[VERSE 1]
“Who deserves greatness
Deserves your hate ...
Yon common cry of curs, whose breath I loathe
As reek o’ the rotten fens.”
                          _Coriolanus._
[VERSE 2]
“Hark! hark! the dogs do bark.”
                          _Nursery Rhyme._
[VERSE 3]
Sons of New England in the fray,
  Do you hear the clamor behind your back?
Do you hear the yelping of Blanche and Tray?
  Sweetheart, and all the mongrel pack?
Girded well with her ocean crags,
  Little our mother heeds their noise;
Her eyes are fixed on crimson flags:
  But you--do you hear it, Yankee boys?
[VERSE 4]
Do you hear them say that the patriot fire
  Burns on her altars too pure and bright,
To the darkened heavens leaping higher,
  Though drenched with the blood of every fight?
That in the light of its searching flame
  Treason and tyrants stand revealed,
And the yielding craven is put to shame
  On Capitol floor or foughten field?
[VERSE 5]
Do you hear the hissing voice which saith
  That she--who bore through all the land
The lyre of Freedom, the torch of Faith,
  And young Invention’s mystic wand--
Should gather her skirts and dwell apart,
  With not one of her sisters to share her fate,--
A Hagar, wandering sick at heart?
  A pariah bearing the nation’s hate?
[VERSE 6]
Sons, who have peopled the gorgeous West,
  And planted the Pilgrim arm anew,
Where by a richer soil caressed,
  It grows as ever its parent grew,--
Say, do you hear--while the very bells
  Of your churches ring with her ancient voice,
And the song of your children sweetly tells
  How true was the land of your fathers’ choice--
[VERSE 7]
Do you hear the traitors who bid you speak
  The word that shall sever the sacred tie?
And ye who dwell by the golden peak,
  Has the subtle whisper glided by?
Has it crossed the immemorial plains
  To coasts where the gray Pacific roars,
And the Pilgrim blood in the people’s veins
  Is pure as the wealth of their mountain ores?
[VERSE 8]
Spirits of sons who side by side
  In a hundred battles fought and fell,
Whom now no East and West divide,
  In the isles where the shades of heroes dwell,--
Say, has it reached your glorious rest,
  And ruffled the calm which crowns you there?
The shame that recreants have confest
  The plot that floats in the troubled air?
[VERSE 9]
Sons of New England, here and there,
  Wherever men are still holding by
The honor our fathers left so fair,--
  Say, do you hear the cowards’ cry?
Crouching amongst her grand old crags,
  Lightly our mother heeds their noise,
With her fond eyes fixed on distant flags;
  But you--do you hear it, Yankee boys?
[VERSE 10]
January 19, 1863.

--- TITLE: GETTYSBURG
--- SOURCE: PG54211
[VERSE 1]
Wave, wave your glorious battle-flags, brave soldiers of the North,
And from the fields your arms have won to-day go proudly forth!
For now, O comrades dear and leal--from whom no ills could part,
Through the long years of hopes and fears, the nation’s constant
      heart--
Men who have driven so oft the foe, so oft have striven in vain,
Yet ever in the perilous hour have crossed his path again,--
At last we have our heart’s desire, from them we met have wrung
A victory that round the world shall long be told and sung!
It was the memory of the past that bore us through the fray,
That gave the grand old army strength to conquer on this day!
[VERSE 2]
Oh, now forget how dark and red Virginia’s rivers flow,
The Rappahannock’s tangled wilds, the glory and the woe;
The fever-hung encampments, where our dying knew full sore
How sweet the north-wind to the cheek it soon shall cool no more;
The fields we fought, and gained, and lost; the lowland sun and rain
That wasted us, that bleached the bones of our unburied slain!
There was no lack of foes to meet, of deaths to die no lack,
And all the hawks of heaven learned to follow on our track;
But henceforth, hovering southward, their flight shall mark afar
The paths of yon retreating host that shun the northern star.
[VERSE 3]
At night before the closing fray, when all the front was still,
We lay in bivouac along the cannon-crested hill.
Ours was the dauntless Second Corps; and many a soldier knew
How sped the fight, and sternly thought of what was yet to do.
Guarding the centre there, we lay, and talked with bated breath
Of Buford’s stand beyond the town, of gallant Reynolds’ death,
Of cruel retreats through pent-up streets by murderous volleys
      swept,--
How well the Stone, the Iron, brigades their bloody outposts kept:
’Twas for the Union, for the Flag, they perished, heroes all,
And we swore to conquer in the end, or even like them to fall.
[VERSE 4]
And passed from mouth to mouth the tale of what grim day just done,
The fight by Round Top’s craggy spur--of all the deadliest one;
It saved the left: but on the right they pressed us back too well,
And like a field in spring the ground was ploughed with shot and
      shell.
There was the ancient graveyard, its hummocks crushed and red.
And there, between them, side by side, the wounded and the dead:
The mangled corpses fallen above--the peaceful dead below,
Laid in their graves, to slumber here, a score of years ago;
It seemed their waking, wandering shades were asking of our slain,
What brought such hideous tumult now where they so still had lain!
[VERSE 5]
Bright rose the sun of Gettysburg that morrow morningtide,
And call of trump and roll of drum from height to height replied.
Hark! from the east already goes up the rattling din;
The Twelfth Corps, winning back their ground, right well the day
      begin!
They whirl fierce Ewell from their front! Now we of the Second pray,
As right and left the brunt have borne, the centre might to-day.
But all was still from hill to hill for many a breathless hour,
While for the coming battle-shock Lee gathered in his power;
And back and forth our leaders rode, who knew not rest or fear,
And along the lines, where’er they came, went up the ringing cheer.
[VERSE 6]
’Twas past the hour of nooning; the summer skies were blue;
Behind the covering timber the foe was hid from view;
So fair and sweet with waving wheat the pleasant valley lay,
It brought to mind our Northern homes and meadows far away;
When the whole western ridge at once was fringed with fire
      and smoke,
Against our lines from seven-score guns the dreadful tempest broke!
Then loud our batteries answer, and far along the crest,
And to and fro the roaring bolts are driven east and west;
Heavy and dark around us glooms the stifling sulphur-cloud,
And the cries of mangled men and horse go up beneath its shroud.
[VERSE 7]
The guns are still: the end is nigh: we grasp our arms anew;
Oh, now let every heart be stanch and every aim be true!
For look! from yonder wood that skirts the valley’s further marge,
The flower of all the Southern host move to the final charge.
By heaven! it is a fearful sight to see their double rank
Come with a hundred battle-flags--a mile from flank to flank!
Tramping the grain to earth, they come, ten thousand men abreast;
Their standards wave--their hearts are brave--they hasten not, nor
      rest,
But close the gaps our cannon make, and onward press, and nigher,
And, yelling at our very front, again pour in their fire.
[VERSE 8]
Now burst our sheeted lightnings forth, now all our wrath has vent!
They die, they wither; through and through their wavering lines are
      rent.
But these are gallant, desperate men, of our own race and land,
Who charge anew, and welcome death, and fight us hand to hand:
Vain, vain! give way, as well ye may--the crimson die is cast!
Their bravest leaders bite the dust, their strength is failing fast;
They yield, they turn, they fly the field: we smite them as
      they run;
Their arms, their colors, are our spoil; the furious fight is done!
Across the plain we follow far and backward push the fray:
Cheer! cheer! the grand old Army at last has won the day!
[VERSE 9]
Hurrah! the day has won the cause! No gray-clad host henceforth
Shall come with fire and sword to tread the highways of the North!
’Twas such a flood as when ye see, along the Atlantic shore,
The great spring-tide roll grandly in with swelling surge and roar:
It seems no wall can stay its leap or balk its wild desire
Beyond the bound that Heaven hath fixed to higher mount, and higher;
But now, when whitest lifts its crest, most loud its billows call,
Touched by the Power that led them on, they fall, and fall,
      and fall.
Even thus, unstayed upon his course, to Gettysburg the foe
His legions led, and fought, and fled, and might no further go.
[VERSE 10]
Full many a dark-eyed Southern girl shall weep her lover dead;
But with a price the fight was ours--we too have tears to shed!
The bells that peal our triumph forth anon shall toll the brave,
Above whose heads the cross must stand, the hill-side grasses wave!
Alas! alas! the trampled grass shall thrive another year,
The blossoms on the apple-boughs with each new spring appear,
But when our patriot-soldiers fall, Earth gives them up to God;
Though their souls rise in clearer skies, their forms are as
      the sod;
Only their names and deeds are ours--but, for a century yet,
The dead who fell at Gettysburg the land shall not forget.
[VERSE 11]
God send us peace! and where for aye the loved and lost recline
Let fall, O South, your leaves of palm--O North, your sprigs
      of pine!
But when, with every ripened year, we keep the harvest-home,
And to the dear Thanksgiving-feast our sons and daughters come--
When children’s children throng the board in the old homestead
      spread,
And the bent soldier of these wars is seated at the head,
Long, long the lads shall listen to hear the gray-beard tell
Of those who fought at Gettysburg and stood their ground so well:
“’Twas for the Union and the Flag,” the veteran shall say,
“Our grand old Army held the ridge, and won that glorious day!”

--- TITLE: CAVALRY Song
--- SOURCE: PG54211
[VERSE 1]
Our good steeds snuff the evening air,
Our pulses with their purpose tingle;
The foeman’s fires are twinkling there;
He leaps to hear our sabres jingle!
Halt!
Each carbine sends its whizzing ball;
Now, cling! clang! forward all,
    Into the fight!
[VERSE 2]
Dash on beneath the smoking dome;
  Through level lightnings gallop nearer!
One look to heaven! No thoughts of home:
  The guidons that we bear are dearer.
    Charge!
Cling! clang! forward all,
Heaven help those whose horses fall!
    Cut left and right!
[VERSE 3]
They flee before our fierce attack!
  They fall! they spread in broken surges!
Now, comrades, bear our wounded back,
  And leave the foeman to his dirges.
    Wheel!
The bugles sound the swift recall;
Cling! clang! backward all!
    Home, and good-night!

--- TITLE: The Discoverer
--- SOURCE: PG15553
[VERSE 1]
  I have a little kinsman
  Whose earthly summers are but three,
  And yet a voyager is he
  Greater than Drake or Frobisher,
  Than all their peers together!
  He is a brave discoverer,
  And, far beyond the tether
  Of them who seek the frozen Pole,
Has sailed where the noiseless surges roll.
  Ay, he has travelled whither
  A winged pilot steered his bark
  Through the portals of the dark,
  Past hoary Mimir's well and tree,
        Across the unknown sea.
[VERSE 2]
  Suddenly, in his fair young hour,
  Came one who bore a flower,
  And laid it in his dimpled hand
        With this command:
  "Henceforth thou art a rover!
  Thou must make a voyage far,
  Sail beneath the evening star,
  And a wondrous land discover."
  --With his sweet smile innocent
        Our little kinsman went.
[VERSE 3]
  Since that time no word
  From the absent has been heard.
        Who can tell
  How he fares, or answer well
  What the little one has found
  Since he left us, outward bound?
  Would that he might return!
  Then should we learn
  From the pricking of his chart
  How the skyey roadways part.
Hush! does not the baby this way bring,
  To lay beside this severed curl,
        Some starry offering
  Of chrysolite or pearl?
[VERSE 4]
        Ah, no! not so!
  We may follow on his track,
        But he comes not back.
        And yet I dare aver
  He is a brave discoverer
  Of climes his elders do not know.
  He has more learning than appears
  On the scroll of twice three thousand years,
  More than in the groves is taught,
  Or from furthest Indies brought;
  He knows, perchance, how spirits fare,--
  What shapes the angels wear,
  What is their guise and speech
  In those lands beyond our reach,--
        And his eyes behold
Things that shall never, never be to mortal hearers told.

--- TITLE: Pan in Wall Street
--- SOURCE: PG15553
[VERSE 1]
Just where the Treasury's marble front
  Looks over Wall Street's mingled nations;
Where Jews and Gentiles most are wont
  To throng for trade and last quotations;
Where, hour by hour, the rates of gold
  Outrival, in the ears of people,
The quarter-chimes, serenely tolled
  From Trinity's undaunted steeple,--
[VERSE 2]
Even there I heard a strange, wild strain
  Sound high above the modern clamor,
Above the cries of greed and gain,
  The curbstone war, the auction's hammer;
And swift, on Music's misty ways,
  It led, from all this strife for millions,
To ancient, sweet-do-nothing days
  Among the kirtle-robed Sicilians.
[VERSE 3]
And as it stilled the multitude,
  And yet more joyous rose, and shriller,
I saw the minstrel, where he stood
 At ease against a Doric pillar:
One hand a droning organ played,
  The other held a Pan's-pipe (fashioned
Like those of old) to lips that made
  The reeds give out that strain impassioned.
[VERSE 4]
'Twas Pan himself had wandered here
  A-strolling through this sordid city,
And piping to the civic ear
  The prelude of some pastoral ditty!
The demigod had crossed the seas,--
  From haunts of shepherd, nymph, and satyr,
And Syracusan times,--to these
  Far shores and twenty centuries later.
[VERSE 5]
A ragged cap was on his head;
  But--hidden thus--there was no doubting
That, all with crispy locks o'erspread,
  His gnarled horns were somewhere sprouting;
His club-feet, cased in rusty shoes,
  Were crossed, as on some frieze you see them,
And trousers, patched of divers hues,
  Concealed his crooked shanks beneath them.
[VERSE 6]
He filled the quivering reeds with sound,
  And o'er his mouth their changes shifted,
And with his goat's-eyes looked around
  Where'er the passing current drifted;
And soon, as on Trinacrian hills
  The nymphs and herdsmen ran to hear him,
Even now the tradesmen from their tills,
  With clerks and porters, crowded near him.
[VERSE 7]
The bulls and bears together drew
  From Jauncey Court and New Street Alley,
As erst, if pastorals be true,
  Came beasts from every wooded valley;
The random passers stayed to list,--
  A boxer AEgon, rough and merry,
A Broadway Daphnis, on his tryst
  With Nais at the Brooklyn Ferry.
[VERSE 8]
A one-eyed Cyclops halted long
  In tattered cloak of army pattern,
And Galatea joined the throng,--
  A blowsy, apple-vending slattern;
While old Silenus staggered out
  From some new-fangled lunch-house handy,
And bade the piper, with a shout,
  To strike up Yankee Doodle Dandy!
[VERSE 9]
A newsboy and a peanut-girl
  Like little Fauns began to caper:
His hair was all in tangled curl,
  Her tawny legs were bare and taper;
And still the gathering larger grew,
  And gave its pence and crowded nigher,
While aye the shepherd-minstrel blew
  His pipe, and struck the gamut higher.
[VERSE 10]
O heart of Nature, beating still
  With throbs her vernal passion taught her,--
Even here, as on the vine-clad hill,
  Or by the Arethusan water!
New forms may fold the speech, new lands
  Arise within these ocean-portals,
But Music waves eternal wands,--
  Enchantress of the souls of mortals!
[VERSE 11]
So thought I,--but among us trod
  A man in blue, with legal baton,
And scoffed the vagrant demigod,
  And pushed him from the step I sat on.
Doubting, I mused upon the cry,
  "Great Pan is dead!"--and all the people
Went on their ways:--and clear and high
  The quarter sounded from the steeple.

--- TITLE: Toujours Amour
--- SOURCE: PG15553
[VERSE 1]
Prithee tell me, Dimple-Chin,
At what age does Love begin?
Your blue eyes have scarcely seen
Summers three, my fairy queen,
But a miracle of sweets,
Soft approaches, sly retreats,
Show the little archer there,
Hidden in your pretty hair;
When didst learn a heart to win?
Prithee tell me, Dimple-Chin!
[VERSE 2]
    "Oh!" the rosy lips reply,
    "I can't tell you if I try.
    'Tis so long I can't remember:
    Ask some younger lass than I!"
[VERSE 3]
Tell, oh, tell me, Grizzled-Face,
Do your heart and head keep pace?
When does hoary Love expire,
When do frosts put out the fire?
Can its embers burn below
All that chill December snow?
Care you still soft hands to press,
Bonny heads to smooth and bless?
When does Love give up the chase?
Tell, oh, tell me, Grizzled-Face!
[VERSE 4]
    "Ah!" the wise old lips reply,
    "Youth may pass and strength may die;
    But of Love I can't foretoken:
    Ask some older sage than I!"

--- TITLE: PETER STUYVESANT'S NEW YEAR'S CALL
--- SOURCE: PG47476
[VERSE 1]
Where nowadays the Battery lies,
  New York had just begun,
A new-born babe, to rub its eyes,
  In Sixteen Sixty-One.
They christened it Nieuw Amsterdam,
  Those burghers grave and stately,
And so, with schnapps and smoke and psalm,
  Lived out their lives sedately.
[VERSE 2]
Two windmills topped their wooden wall,
  On Stadthuys gazing down,
On fort, and cabbage-plots, and all
  The quaintly gabled town;
These flapped their wings and shifted backs,
  As ancient scrolls determine,
To scare the savage Hackensacks,
  Paumanks, and other vermin.
[VERSE 3]
At night the loyal settlers lay
  Betwixt their feather-beds;
In hose and breeches walked by day,
  And smoked, and wagged their heads.
No changeful fashions came from France,
  The freulen to bewilder,
And cost the burgher's purse, perchance,
  Its every other guilder.
[VERSE 4]
In petticoats of linsey-red,
  And jackets neatly kept,
The vrouws their knitting-needles sped
  And deftly spun and swept.
Few modern-school flirtations there
  Set wheels of scandal trundling,
But youths and maidens did their share
  Of staid, old-fashioned bundling.
[VERSE 5]
--The New Year opened clear and cold;
  The snow, a Flemish ell
In depth, lay over Beeckman's Wold
  And Wolfert's frozen well.
Each burgher shook his kitchen-doors,
  Drew on his Holland leather,
Then stamped through drifts to do the chores,
  Beshrewing all such weather.
[VERSE 6]
But--after herring, ham, and kraut--
  To all the gathered town
The Dominie preached the morning out,
  In Calvinistic gown;
While tough old Peter Stuyvesant
  Sat pewed in foremost station,--
The potent, sage, and valiant
  Third Governor of the nation.
[VERSE 7]
Prayer over, at his mansion hall,
  With cake and courtly smile,
He met the people, one and all,
  In gubernatorial style;
Yet missed, though now the day was old,
  An ancient fellow-feaster,--
Heer Govert Loockermans, that bold
  Brewer and burgomeester;
[VERSE 8]
Who, in his farmhouse, close without
  The picket's eastern end,
Sat growling at the twinge of gout
  That kept him from his friend.
But Peter strapped his wooden peg,
  When tea and cake were ended
(Meanwhile the sound remaining leg
  Its high jack-boot defended),
[VERSE 9]
A woolsey cloak about him threw,
  And swore, by wind and limb,
Since Govert kept from Peter's view,
  Peter would visit him;
Then sallied forth, through snow and blast,
  While many a humbler greeter
Stood wondering whereaway so fast
  Strode bluff Hardkoppig Pieter.
[VERSE 10]
Past quay and cowpath, through a lane
  Of vats and mounded tans,
He puffed along, with might and main,
  To Govert Loockermans;
Once there, his right of entry took,
  And hailed his ancient crony:
"Myn Gód! in dese Manhattoes, Loock,
  Ve gets more snow as money!"
[VERSE 11]
To which, and after whiffs profound,
  With doubtful wink and nod,
There came at last responsive sound:
  "Yah, Peter; yah, Myn Gód!"
Then goedevrouw Marie sat her guest
  Beneath the chimney-gable,
And courtesied, bustling at her best
  To spread the New Year's table.
[VERSE 12]
She brought the pure and genial schnapps,
  That years before had come--
In the "Nieuw Nederlandts," perhaps--
  To cheer the settlers' home;
The long-stemmed pipes; the fragrant roll
  Of pressed and crispy Spanish;
Then placed the earthen mugs and bowl,
  Nor long delayed to vanish.
[VERSE 13]
Thereat, with cheery nod and wink,
  And honors of the day,
The trader mixed the Governor's drink
  As evening sped away.
That ancient room! I see it now:
  The carven nutwood dresser;
The drawers, that many a burgher's vrouw
  Begrudged their rich possessor;
[VERSE 14]
The brace of high-backed leathern chairs,
  Brass-nailed at every seam;
Six others, ranged in equal pairs;
  The bacon hung abeam;
The chimney-front, with porcelain shelft;
  The hearty wooden fire;
The picture, on the steaming delft,
  Of David and Goliah.
[VERSE 15]
I see the two old Dutchmen sit
  Like Magog and his mate,
And hear them, when their pipes are lit,
  Discuss affairs of state:
The clique that would their sway demean;
  The pestilent importation
Of wooden nutmegs, from the lean
  And losel Yankee nation.
[VERSE 16]
But when the subtle juniper
  Assumed its sure command,
They drank the buxom loves that were,--
  They drank the Motherland;
They drank the famous Swedish wars,
  Stout Peter's special glory,
While Govert proudly showed the scars
  Of Indian contests gory.
[VERSE 17]
Erelong, the berry's power awoke
  Some music in their brains,
And, trumpet-like, through rolling smoke,
  Rang long-forgotten strains,--
Old Flemish snatches, full of blood,
  Of phantom ships and battle;
And Peter, with his leg of wood,
  Made floor and casement rattle.
[VERSE 18]
Then round and round the dresser pranced,
  The chairs began to wheel,
And on the board the punch-bowl danced
  A Netherlandish reel;
Till midnight o'er the farmhouse spread
  Her New Year's skirts of sable,
And inch by inch, each puzzled head
  Dropt down upon the table.
[VERSE 19]
But still to Peter, as he dreamed,
  The table spread and turned;
The chimney-log blazed high, and seemed
  To circle as it burned;
The town into the vision grew
  From ending to beginning;
Fort, wall, and windmill met his view,
  All widening and spinning.
[VERSE 20]
The cowpaths, leading to the docks,
  Grew broader, whirling past,
And checkered into shining blocks,--
  A city fair and vast;
Stores, churches, mansions, overspread
  The metamorphosed island,
While not a beaver showed his head
  From Swamp to Kalchook highland.
[VERSE 21]
Eftsoons the picture passed away;
  Hours after, Peter woke
To see a spectral streak of day
 Gleam in through fading smoke;
Still slept old Govert, snoring on
  In most melodious numbers;
No dreams of Eighteen Sixty-One
  Commingled with his slumbers.
[VERSE 22]
But Peter, from the farmhouse door,
  Gazed doubtfully around,
Rejoiced to find himself once more
  On sure and solid ground.
The sky was somewhat dark ahead,
  Wind east, the morning lowery;
And on he pushed, a two-miles' tread,
  To breakfast at his Bouwery.

--- TITLE: SALEM
--- SOURCE: PG47476
[VERSE 1]
Soe, Mistress Anne, faire neighboure myne,
  How rides a witch when night-winds blowe?
Folk say that you are none too goode
To joyne the crewe in Salem woode,
When one you wot of gives the signe:
  Righte well, methinks, the pathe you knowe.
[VERSE 2]
In meetinge-time I watched you well,
  Whiles godly Master Parris prayed:
Your folded hands laye on your booke;
But Richard answered to a looke
That fain would tempt him unto hell,
  Where, Mistress Anne, your place is made.
[VERSE 3]
You looke into my Richard's eyes
  With evill glances shamelesse growne;
I found about his wriste a hair,
And guesse what fingers tyed it there!
He shall not lightly be your prize--
  Your Master first shall take his owne.
[VERSE 4]
'Tis not in nature he should be
  (Who loved me soe when Springe was greene)
A childe, to hange upon your gowne!
He loved me well in Salem towne
Until this wanton witcherie
  His heart and myne crept dark betweene.
[VERSE 5]
Last Sabbath nighte, the gossips saye,
  Your goodman missed you from his side.
He had no strength to move, until
Agen, as if in slumber still,
Beside him at the dawne you laye.
  Tell, nowe, what meanwhile did betide.
[VERSE 6]
Dame Anne, mye hate goe with you fleete
  As drifts the Bay fogg overhead--
Or over yonder hill-topp, where
There is a tree ripe fruit shall bear
When, neighbour myne, your wicked feet
  The stones of Gallows Hill shall tread.

--- TITLE: AARON BURR'S WOOING
--- SOURCE: PG47476
[VERSE 1]
From the commandant's quarters on Westchester height
The blue hills of Ramapo lie in full sight:
On their slope gleam the gables that shield his heart's queen,
But the redcoats are wary--the Hudson's between.
Through the camp runs a jest: "There's no moon--'twill be dark;
'Tis odds little Aaron will go on a spark!"
And the toast of the troopers is: "Pickets, lie low,
And good luck to the colonel and Widow Prevost!"
[VERSE 2]
Eight miles to the river he gallops his steed,
Lays him bound in the barge, bids his escort make speed,
Loose their swords, sit athwart, through the fleet reach yon shore.
Not a word--not a plash of the thick-muffled oar!
Once across, once again in the seat and away--
Five leagues are soon over when love has the say;
And "Old Put" and his rider a bridle-path know
To the Hermitage manor of Madame Prevost.
[VERSE 3]
Lightly done! but he halts in the grove's deepest glade,
Ties his horse to a birch, trims his cue, slings his blade,
Wipes the dust and the dew from his smooth, handsome face.
With the 'kerchief she broidered and bordered in lace;
Then slips through the box-rows and taps at the hall.
Sees the glint of a waxlight, a hand white and small,
And the door is unbarred by herself all aglow--
Half in smiles, half in tears--Theodosia Prevost.
[VERSE 4]
Alack for the soldier that's buried and gone!
What's a volley above him, a wreath on his stone,
Compared with sweet life and a wife for one's view
Like this dame, ripe and warm in her India fichu?
She chides her bold lover, yet holds him more dear,
For the daring that brings him a night-rider here;
British gallants by day through her doors come and go,
But a Yankee's the winner of Theo. Prevost.
[VERSE 5]
Where's the widow or maid with a mouth to be kist,
When Burr comes a-wooing, that long would resist?
Lights and wine on the beaufet, the shutters all fast,
And "Old Put" stamps in vain till an hour has flown past--
But an hour, for eight leagues must be covered ere day;
Laughs Aaron, "Let Washington frown as he may,
When he hears of me next, in a raid on the foe,
He'll forgive this night's tryst with the Widow Prevost!"

--- TITLE: HOW OLD BROWN TOOK HARPER'S FERRY
--- SOURCE: PG47476
[VERSE 1]
John Brown in Kansas settled, like a steadfast Yankee farmer,
  Brave and godly, with four sons, all stalwart men of might.
There he spoke aloud for freedom, and the Border-strife grew warmer,
  Till the Rangers fired his dwelling, in his absence, in the night;
          And Old Brown,
          Osawatomie Brown,
Came homeward in the morning--to find his house burned down.
[VERSE 2]
Then he grasped his trusty rifle and boldly fought for freedom;
  Smote from border unto border the fierce, invading band;
And he and his brave boys vowed--so might Heaven help and speed 'em!--
  They would save those grand old prairies from the curse that blights
    the land;
          And Old Brown,
          Osawatomie Brown,
Said, "Boys, the Lord will aid us!" and he shoved his ramrod down.
[VERSE 3]
And the Lord _did_ aid these men, and they labored day and even,
  Saving Kansas from its peril; and their very lives seemed charmed,
Till the ruffians killed one son, in the blessed light of Heaven,--
  In cold blood the fellows slew him, as he journeyed all unarmed;
          Then Old Brown,
          Osawatomie Brown,
Shed not a tear, but shut his teeth, and frowned a terrible frown!
[VERSE 4]
Then they seized another brave boy,--not amid the heat of battle,
  But in peace, behind his ploughshare,--and they loaded him with chains,
And with pikes, before their horses, even as they goad their cattle,
  Drove him cruelly, for their sport, and at last blew out his brains;
          Then Old Brown,
          Osawatomie Brown,
Raised his right hand up to Heaven, calling Heaven's vengeance down.
[VERSE 5]
And he swore a fearful oath, by the name of the Almighty,
  He would hunt this ravening evil that had scathed and torn him so;
He would seize it by the vitals; he would crush it day and night; he
  Would so pursue its footsteps, so return it blow for blow,
          That Old Brown,
          Osawatomie Brown,
Should be a name to swear by, in backwoods or in town!
[VERSE 6]
Then his beard became more grizzled, and his wild blue eye grew wilder,
  And more sharply curved his hawk's-nose, snuffing battle from afar;
And he and the two boys left, though the Kansas strife waxed milder,
  Grew more sullen, till was over the bloody Border War,
          And Old Brown,
          Osawatomie Brown,
Had gone crazy, as they reckoned by his fearful glare and frown.
[VERSE 7]
So he left the plains of Kansas and their bitter woes behind him,
  Slipt off into Virginia, where the statesmen all are born,
Hired a farm by Harper's Ferry, and no one knew where to find him,
  Or whether he'd turned parson, or was jacketed and shorn;
          For Old Brown,
          Osawatomie Brown,
Mad as he was, knew texts enough to wear a parson's gown.
[VERSE 8]
He bought no ploughs and harrows, spades and shovels, and such trifles;
  But quietly to his rancho there came, by every train,
Boxes full of pikes and pistols, and his well-beloved Sharp's rifles;
  And eighteen other madmen joined their leader there again.
          Says Old Brown,
          Osawatomie Brown,
"Boys, we've got an army large enough to march and take the town!
[VERSE 9]
"Take the town, and seize the muskets, free the negroes and then arm
    them;
  Carry the County and the State, ay, and all the potent South.
On their own heads be the slaughter, if their victims rise to harm them--
  These Virginians! who believed not, nor would heed the warning mouth."
          Says Old Brown,
          Osawatomie Brown,
"The world shall see a Republic, or my name is not John Brown."
[VERSE 10]
'Twas the sixteenth of October, on the evening of a Sunday:
  "This good work," declared the captain, "shall be on a holy night!"
It was on a Sunday evening, and before the noon of Monday,
  With two sons, and Captain Stephens, fifteen privates--black and white,
          Captain Brown,
          Osawatomie Brown,
Marched across the bridged Potomac, and knocked the sentry down;
[VERSE 11]
Took the guarded armory-building, and the muskets and the cannon;
  Captured all the county majors and the colonels, one by one;
Scared to death each gallant scion of Virginia they ran on,
  And before the noon of Monday, I say, the deed was done.
          Mad Old Brown,
          Osawatomie Brown,
With his eighteen other crazy men, went in and took the town.
[VERSE 12]
Very little noise and bluster, little smell of powder made he;
  It was all done in the midnight, like the Emperor's _coup d'état_.
"Cut the wires! Stop the rail-cars! Hold the streets and bridges!" said
    he,
  Then declared the new Republic, with himself for guiding star,--
          This Old Brown,
          Osawatomie Brown;
And the bold two thousand citizens ran off and left the town.
[VERSE 13]
Then was riding and railroading and expressing here and thither;
  And the Martinsburg Sharpshooters and the Charlestown Volunteers,
And the Shepherdstown and Winchester militia hastened whither
  Old Brown was said to muster his ten thousand grenadiers.
          General Brown!
          Osawatomie Brown!
Behind whose rampant banner all the North was pouring down.
[VERSE 14]
But at last, 'tis said, some prisoners escaped from Old Brown's durance,
  And the effervescent valor of the Chivalry broke out,
When they learned that nineteen madmen had the marvellous assurance--
  Only nineteen--thus to seize the place and drive them straight about;
          And Old Brown,
          Osawatomie Brown,
Found an army come to take him, encamped around the town.
[VERSE 15]
But to storm, with all the forces I have mentioned, was too risky;
  So they hurried off to Richmond for the Government Marines,
Tore them from their weeping matrons, fired their souls with Bourbon
    whiskey,
  Till they battered down Brown's castle with their ladders and machines;
          And Old Brown,
          Osawatomie Brown,
Received three bayonet stabs, and a cut on his brave old crown.
[VERSE 16]
Tallyho! the old Virginia gentry gather to the baying!
  In they rushed and killed the game, shooting lustily away;
And whene'er they slew a rebel, those who came too late for slaying,
  Not to lose a share of glory, fired their bullets in his clay;
          And Old Brown,
          Osawatomie Brown,
Saw his sons fall dead beside him, and between them laid him down.
[VERSE 17]
How the conquerors wore their laurels; how they hastened on the trial;
  How Old Brown was placed, half dying, on the Charlestown court-house
    floor;
How he spoke his grand oration, in the scorn of all denial;
  What the brave old madman told them,--these are known the country o'er.
          "Hang Old Brown,
          Osawatomie Brown,"
Said the judge, "and all such rebels!" with his most judicial frown.
[VERSE 18]
But, Virginians, don't do it! for I tell you that the flagon,
  Filled with blood of Old Brown's offspring, was first poured by
    Southern hands;
And each drop from Old Brown's life-veins, like the red gore of the
    dragon,
  May spring up a vengeful Fury, hissing through your slave-worn lands!
          And Old Brown,
          Osawatomie Brown,
May trouble you more than ever, when you've nailed his coffin down!

--- TITLE: SUMTER
--- SOURCE: PG47476
[VERSE 1]
Came the morning of that day
When the God to whom we pray
Gave the soul of Henry Clay
    To the land;
How we loved him, living, dying!
But his birthday banners flying
Saw us asking and replying
    Hand to hand.
[VERSE 2]
For we knew that far away,
Round the fort in Charleston Bay,
Hung the dark impending fray,
    Soon to fall;
And that Sumter's brave defender
Had the summons to surrender
Seventy loyal hearts and tender--
    (Those were all!)
[VERSE 3]
And we knew the April sun
Lit the length of many a gun--
Hosts of batteries to the one
    Island crag;
Guns and mortars grimly frowning,
Johnson, Moultrie, Pinckney, crowning,
And ten thousand men disowning
    The old flag.
[VERSE 4]
Oh, the fury of the fight
Even then was at its height!
Yet no breath, from noon till night,
    Reached us here;
We had almost ceased to wonder,
And the day had faded under,
When the echo of the thunder
    Filled each ear!
[VERSE 5]
Then our hearts more fiercely beat,
As we crowded on the street,
Hot to gather and repeat
    All the tale;
All the doubtful chances turning,
Till our souls with shame were burning,
As if twice our bitter yearning
    Could avail!
[VERSE 6]
Who had fired the earliest gun?
Was the fort by traitors won?
Was there succor? What was done
    Who could know?
And once more our thoughts would wander
To the gallant, lone commander,
On his battered ramparts grander
    Than the foe.
[VERSE 7]
Not too long the brave shall wait:
On their own heads be their fate,
Who against the hallowed State
    Dare begin;
Flag defied and compact riven!
In the record of high Heaven
How shall Southern men be shriven
    For the sin!

--- TITLE: ABRAHAM LINCOLN
--- SOURCE: PG47476
[VERSE 1]
"Forgive them, for they know not what they do!"
  He said, and so went shriven to his fate,--
Unknowing went, that generous heart and true.
  Even while he spoke, the slayer lay in wait,
  And when the morning opened Heaven's gate
There passed the whitest soul a nation knew.
  Henceforth all thoughts of pardon are too late;
They, in whose cause that arm its weapon drew,
  Have murdered Mercy. Now alone shall stand
Blind Justice, with the sword unsheathed she wore.
  Hark, from the eastern to the western strand,
The swelling thunder of the people's roar:
  What words they murmur,--Fetter not her hand!
So let it smite, such deeds shall be no more!

--- TITLE: ISRAEL FREYER'S BID FOR GOLD
--- SOURCE: PG47476
[VERSE 1]
Zounds! how the price went flashing through
Wall Street, William, Broad Street, New!
All the specie in all the land
Held in one Ring by a giant hand--
For millions more it was ready to pay,
And throttle the Street on hangman's-day.
Up from the Gold Pit's nether hell,
While the innocent fountain rose and fell,
Loud and higher the bidding rose,
And the bulls, triumphant, faced their foes.
It seemed as if Satan himself were in it:
Lifting it--one per cent a minute--
Through the bellowing broker, there amid,
Who made the terrible, final bid!
    High over all, and ever higher,
    Was heard the voice of Israel Freyer,--
A doleful knell in the storm-swept mart,--
"Five millions more! and for any part
    I'll give One Hundred and Sixty!"
[VERSE 2]
Israel Freyer--the Government Jew--
Good as the best--soaked through and through
With credit gained in the year he sold
Our Treasury's precious hoard of gold;
Now through his thankless mouth rings out
The leaguers' last and cruellest shout!
Pity the shorts? Not they, indeed,
While a single rival's left to bleed!
Down come dealers in silks and hides,
Crowding the Gold Room's rounded sides,
Jostling, trampling each other's feet,
Uttering groans in the outer street;
Watching, with upturned faces pale,
The scurrying index mark its tale;
    Hearing the bid of Israel Freyer,--
    That ominous voice, would it never tire?
"Five millions more!--for any part
(If it breaks your firm, if it cracks your heart),
    I'll give One Hundred and Sixty!"
[VERSE 3]
One Hundred and Sixty! Can't be true!
What will the bears-at-forty do?
How will the merchants pay their dues?
How will the country stand the news?
What'll the banks--but listen! hold!
In screwing upward the price of gold
To that dangerous, last, particular peg,
They have killed their Goose with the Golden Egg!
Just there the metal came pouring out,
All ways at once, like a water-spout,
Or a rushing, gushing, yellow flood,
That drenched the bulls wherever they stood!
Small need to open the Washington main,
Their coffer-dams were burst with the strain!
    It came by runners, it came by wire,
    To answer the bid of Israel Freyer,
It poured in millions from every side,
And almost strangled him as he cried,--
    "I'll give One Hundred and Sixty!"
[VERSE 4]
Like Vulcan after Jupiter's kick,
Or the aphoristical Rocket's stick,
Down, down, down, the premium fell,
Faster than this rude rhyme can tell!
Thirty per cent the index slid,
Yet Freyer still kept making his bid,--
"One Hundred and Sixty for any part!"
--The sudden ruin had crazed _his_ heart,
Shattered his senses, cracked his brain,
And left him crying again and again,--
Still making his bid at the market's top
(Like the Dutchman's leg that never could stop),
"One Hundred and Sixty--Five Millions more!"
Till they dragged him, howling, off the floor.
    The very last words that seller and buyer
    Heard from the mouth of Israel Freyer--
A cry to remember long as they live--
Were, "I'll take Five Millions more! I'll give--
    I'll give One Hundred and Sixty!"
[VERSE 5]
Suppose (to avoid the appearance of evil)
There's such a thing as a Personal Devil,
It would seem that his Highness here got hold,
For once, of a bellowing Bull in Gold!
Whether bull or bear, it wouldn't much matter
Should Israel Freyer keep up his clatter
On earth or under it (as, they say,
He is doomed) till the general Judgment Day,
When the Clerk, as he cites him to answer for 't,
Shall bid him keep silence in that Court!
But it matters most, as it seems to me,
That my countrymen, great and strong and free,
So marvel at fellows who seem to win,
That if even a Clown can only begin
By stealing a railroad, and use its purse
For cornering stocks and gold, or--worse--
For buying a Judge and Legislature,
And sinking still lower poor human nature,
The gaping public, whatever befall,
Will swallow him, tandem, harlots, and all!
While our rich men drivel and stand amazed
At the dust and pother his gang have raised,
And make us remember a nursery tale
Of the four-and-twenty who feared one snail.
[VERSE 6]
What's bred in the bone will breed, you know;
Clowns and their trainers, high and low,
Will cut such capers, long as they dare,
While honest Poverty says its prayer.
But tell me what prayer or fast can save
Some hoary candidate for the grave,
The market's wrinkled Giant Despair,
Muttering, brooding, scheming there,--
Founding a college or building a church
Lest Heaven should leave him in the lurch!
Better come out in the rival way,
Issue your scrip in open day,
And pour your wealth in the grimy fist
Of some gross-mouthed, gambling pugilist;
Leave toil and poverty where they lie,
Pass thinkers, workers, artists, by,
Your pot-house fag from his counters bring
And make him into a Railway King!
Between such Gentiles and such Jews
Little enough one finds to choose:
Either the other will buy and use,
Eat the meat and throw him the bone,
And leave him to stand the brunt alone.
[VERSE 7]
--Let the tempest come, that's gathering near,
And give us a better atmosphere!

--- TITLE: CUSTER
--- SOURCE: PG47476
[VERSE 1]
    What! shall that sudden blade
        Leap out no more?
    No more thy hand be laid
  Upon the sword-hilt smiting sore?
        O for another such
    The charger's rein to clutch,--
  One equal voice to summon victory,
    Sounding thy battle-cry,
  Brave darling of the soldiers' choice!
    Would there were one more voice!
[VERSE 2]
    O gallant charge, too bold!
    O fierce, imperious greed
To pierce the clouds that in their darkness hold
    Slaughter of man and steed!
        Now, stark and cold,
  Among thy fallen braves thou liest,
  And even with thy blood defiest
        The wolfish foe:
    But ah, thou liest low,
And all our birthday song is hushed indeed!
[VERSE 3]
    Young lion of the plain,
    Thou of the tawny mane!
  Hotly the soldiers' hearts shall beat,
    Their mouths thy death repeat,
  Their vengeance seek the trail again
    Where thy red doomsmen be;
  But on the charge no more shall stream
  Thy hair,--no more thy sabre gleam,--
    No more ring out thy battle-shout,
      Thy cry of victory!
[VERSE 4]
    Not when a hero falls
    The sound a world appalls:
    For while we plant his cross
  There is a glory, even in the loss:
    But when some craven heart
    From honor dares to part,
  Then, then, the groan, the blanching cheek,
    And men in whispers speak,
  Nor kith nor country dare reclaim
    From the black depths his name.
[VERSE 5]
    Thou, wild young warrior, rest,
  By all the prairie winds caressed!
    Swift was thy dying pang;
    Even as the war-cry rang
  Thy deathless spirit mounted high
    And sought Columbia's sky:--
  There, to the northward far,
    Shines a new star,
  And from it blazes down
  The light of thy renown!

--- TITLE: LIBERTY ENLIGHTENING THE WORLD
--- SOURCE: PG47476
[VERSE 1]
Warden at ocean's gate,
  Thy feet on sea and shore,
Like one the skies await
  When time shall be no more!
What splendors crown thy brow?
What bright dread angel Thou,
  Dazzling the waves before
    Thy station great?
[VERSE 2]
"My name is Liberty!
  From out a mighty land
I face the ancient sea,
  I lift to God my hand;
By day in Heaven's light,
A pillar of fire by night,
  At ocean's gate I stand
    Nor bend the knee.
[VERSE 3]
"The dark Earth lay in sleep.
  Her children crouched forlorn,
Ere on the western steep
  I sprang to height, reborn:
Then what a joyous shout
The quickened lands gave out,
  And all the choir of morn
    Sang anthems deep.
[VERSE 4]
"Beneath yon firmament.
  The New World to the Old
My sword and summons sent,
  My azure flag unrolled:
The Old World's hands renew
Their strength; the form ye view
  Came from a living mould
    In glory blent.
[VERSE 5]
"O ye, whose broken spars
  Tell of the storms ye met,
Enter! fear not the bars
  Across your pathway set;
Enter at Freedom's porch,
For you I lift my torch,
  For you my coronet
    Is rayed with stars.
[VERSE 6]
"But ye that hither draw
  To desecrate my fee,
Nor yet have held in awe
  The justice that makes free,--
Avaunt, ye darkling brood!
By Right my house hath stood:
  My name is Liberty,
    My throne is Law."
[VERSE 7]
O wonderful and bright,
  Immortal Freedom, hail!
Front, in thy fiery might,
  The midnight and the gale;
Undaunted on this base
Guard well thy dwelling-place:
  Till the last sun grow pale
    Let there be Light!

--- TITLE: CUBA
--- SOURCE: PG47476
[VERSE 1]
    Is it naught? Is it naught
That the South-wind brings her wail to our shore,
  That the spoilers compass our desolate sister?
Is it naught? Must we say to her, "Strive no more,"
  With the lips wherewith we loved her and kissed her?
With the mocking lips wherewith we said,
  "Thou art the dearest and fairest to us
Of all the daughters the sea hath bred,
  Of all green-girdled isles that woo us!"
    Is it naught?
[VERSE 2]
    Must ye wait? Must ye wait,
Till they ravage her gardens of orange and palm,
  Till her heart is dust, till her strength is water?
Must ye see them trample her, and be calm
  As priests when a virgin is led to slaughter?
Shall they smite the marvel of all lands,--
  The nation's longing, the Earth's completeness,--
On her red mouth dropping myrrh, her hands
  Filled with fruitage and spice and sweetness?
    Must ye wait?
[VERSE 3]
    In the day, in the night,
In the burning day, in the dolorous night,
  Her sun-browned cheeks are stained with weeping.
Her watch-fires beacon the misty height:--
  Why are her friends and lovers sleeping?
"Ye, at whose ear the flatterer bends,
  Who were my kindred before all others,--
Hath he set your hearts afar, my friends?
  Hath he made ye alien, my brothers,
    Day and night?"
[VERSE 4]
    Hear ye not? Hear ye not
From the hollow sea the sound of her voice;
  The passionate far-off tone which sayeth:
"Alas, my brothers! alas, what choice,--
  The lust that shameth, the sword that slayeth?
They bind me! they rend my delicate locks;
  They shred the beautiful robes I won me!
My round limbs bleed on the mountain rocks:
  Save me, ere they have quite undone me!"
    Hear ye not?
[VERSE 5]
    Speak at last! Speak at last!
In the might of your strength, in the strength of your right,
  Speak out at last to the treacherous spoiler!
Say: "Will ye harry her in our sight?
  Ye shall not trample her down, nor soil her!
Loose her bonds! let her rise in her loveliness,--
  Our virginal sister; or, if ye shame her,
Dark Amnon shall rue for her sore distress,
  And her sure revenge shall be that of Tamar!"
    Speak at last!

--- TITLE: HYMN OF THE WEST
--- SOURCE: PG47476
[VERSE 1]
O Thou, whose glorious orbs on high
  Engird the earth with splendor round,
From out thy secret place draw nigh
  The courts and temples of this ground;
      Eternal Light,
      Fill with thy might
  These domes that in thy purpose grew,
  And lift a nation's heart anew!
[VERSE 2]
Illumine Thou each pathway here,
  To show the marvels God hath wrought!
Since first thy people's chief and seer
  Looked up with that prophetic thought,
      Bade Time unroll
      The fateful scroll,
  And empire unto Freedom gave
  From cloudland height to tropic wave.
[VERSE 3]
Poured through the gateways of the North
  Thy mighty rivers join their tide,
And, on the wings of morn sent forth,
  Their mists the far-off peaks divide.
      By Thee unsealed,
      The mountains yield
  Ores that the wealth of Ophir shame,
  And gems enwrought of seven-hued flame.
[VERSE 4]
Lo, through what years the soil hath lain
  At thine own time to give increase--
The greater and the lesser grain,
  The ripening boll, the myriad fleece!
      Thy creatures graze
      Appointed ways;
  League after league across the land
  The ceaseless herds obey thy hand.
[VERSE 5]
Thou, whose high archways shine most clear
  Above the plenteous Western plain,
Thine ancient tribes from round the sphere
  To breathe its quickening air are fain:
      And smiles the sun
      To see made one
  Their brood throughout Earth's greenest space,
  Land of the new and lordlier race!

--- TITLE: "Voice of the Western Wind"
--- SOURCE: PG2619
[VERSE 1]
Voice of the western wind!
Thou singest from afar,
Rich with the music of a land
Where all my memories are;
But in thy song I only hear
The echo of a tone
That fell divinely on my ear
In days forever flown.
[VERSE 2]
Star of the western sky!
Thou beamest from afar,
With lustre caught from eyes I knew
Whose orbs were each a star;
But, oh, those orbs--too wildly bright--
No more eclipse thine own,
And never shall I find the light
Of days forever flown!

--- TITLE: THE DOORSTEP
--- SOURCE: PG2620
[VERSE 1]
The conference-meeting through at last,
We boys around the vestry waited
To see the girls come tripping past,
Like snow-birds willing to be mated.
[VERSE 2]
Not braver he that leaps the wall
By level musket-flashes bitten,
Than I, that stepped before them all
Who longed to see me get the mitten.
[VERSE 3]
But no! she blushed and took my arm:
We let the old folks have the highway,
And started toward the Maple Farm
Along a kind of lovers' by-way.
[VERSE 4]
I can't remember what we said, -
'Twas nothing worth a song or story;
Yet that rude path by which we sped
Seemed all transformed and in a glory.
[VERSE 5]
The snow was crisp beneath our feet,
The moon was full, the fields were gleaming;
By hood and tippet sheltered sweet,
Her face with youth and health was beaming.
[VERSE 6]
The little hand outside her muff
(O sculptor! if you could but mold it)
So lightly touched my jacket-cuff,
To keep it warm I had to hold it.
[VERSE 7]
To have her with me there alone, -
'Twas love and fear and triumph blended;
At last we reached the foot-worn stone
Where that delicious journey ended.
[VERSE 8]
The old folks, too, were almost home:
Her dimpled hand the latches fingered,
We heard the voices nearer come,
Yet on the doorstep still we lingered.
[VERSE 9]
She shook her ringlets from her hood,
And with a "Thank you, Ned!" dissembled;
But yet I knew she understood
With what a daring wish I trembled.
[VERSE 10]
A cloud passed kindly overhead,
The moon was slyly peeping through it,
Yet hid its face, as if it said -
"Come, now or never! do it! do it!"
[VERSE 11]
My lips till then had only known
The kiss of mother and of sister, -
But somehow, full upon her own
Sweet, rosy, darling mouth, - I kissed her!
[VERSE 12]
Perhaps 'twas boyish love: yet still,
O listless woman! weary lover!
To feel once more that fresh, wild thrill
I'd give - but who can live youth over?

--- TITLE: Provencal Lovers
--- SOURCE: PG2622
[VERSE 1]
Within the garden of Beaucaire
He met her by a secret stair,--
The night was centuries ago.
Said Aucassin, "My love, my pet,
These old confessors vex me so!
They threaten all the pains of hell
Unless I give you up, ma belle";--
Said Aucassin to Nicolette.
[VERSE 2]
"Now who should there in Heaven be
To fill your place, ma tres-douce mie?
To reach that spot I little care!
There all the droning priests are met;
All the old cripples, too, are there
That unto shrines and altars cling
To filch the Peter-pence we bring";--
Said Aucassin to Nicolette.
[VERSE 3]
"There are the barefoot monks and friars
With gowns well tattered by the briars,
The saints who lift their eyes and whine:
I like them not--a starveling set!
Who'd care with folk like these to dine?
The other road 'twere just as well
That you and I should take, ma belle!"--
Said Aucassin to Nicolette.
[VERSE 4]
"To purgatory I would go
With pleasant comrades whom we know,
Fair scholars, minstrels, lusty knights
Whose deeds the land will not forget,
The captains of a hundred fights,
The men of valor and degree:
We'll join that gallant company,"--
Said Aucassin to Nicolette.
[VERSE 5]
"There, too, are jousts and joyance rare,
And beauteous ladies debonair,
The pretty dames, the merry brides,
Who with their wedded lords coquette
And have a friend or two besides,--
And all in gold and trappings gay,
With furs, and crests in vair and gray,"--
Said Aucassin to Nicolette.
[VERSE 6]
"Sweet players on the cithern strings,
And they who roam the world like kings,
Are gathered there, so blithe and free!
Pardie! I'd join them now, my pet,
If you went also, ma douce mie!
The joys of Heaven I'd forego
To have you with me there below,"--
Said Aucassin to Nicolette.
