# author: Anonymous (not attributed in item)
# language: eng
# source: ProjectGutenberg/ebook_76941 https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/76941
# licence: public domain in the USA; Project Gutenberg ebook rights affirmation
# edition: Printed for the Navy Records Society, MDCCCCVIII (1908), volume XXXIII
# attribution: printed author credit retained; see per-item source and batch evidence
# structure: stanza boundaries retained from the supplied edition
# stripped: source typography, stanza numerals, page numbers and editorial apparatus
# songs: 179

--- TITLE: The Pilgrims Sea Voyage [item: PG76941-pg76941-003]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 4158-4242
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Men may leue alle gamys,
That saylen to seynt Jamys!
Ffor many a men hit gramys,
  When they begyn to sayle.
Ffor when they haue take the see,
At Sandwyche, or at Wynchylsee.
At Brystow, or where that hit bee.
  Theyr hertes begyn to fayle.

[VERSE 2]
Anone the mastyr commaundeth fast
To hys shyp-men in alle the hast,
To dresse hem sone about the mast,
  Theyr takelyng to make.
With “howe! hissa!” then they cry,
“What, howe, mate! thow stondyst to ny,
Thy felow may nat hale the by;”
  Thus they begyn to crake.

[VERSE 3]
A boy or tweyn anone up styen,
And ouerthwart the sayle-yerde lyen;--
“Y how! taylia!” the remenaunt cryen,
  And pulle with alle theyr myght.
“Bestowe the boote, bote-swayne, anon,
That our pylgryms may pley theron;
For som ar lyle to cowgh and grone
  Or hit be full mydnyght.

[VERSE 4]
“Hale the bowelyne! now, vere the shete!--
Cooke, make redy anoon our mete,
Our pylgryms haue no lust to ete,
  I pray god yeue hem rest!”
“Go to the helm! what, howe! no nere?
Steward, felow! A pot of bere!”
“Ye shalle haue, sir, with good chere,
  Anon alle of the best.”

[VERSE 5]
“Y howe! trussa! hale in the brayles!
Thou halyst nat, be god, thow fayles!
O se howe welle owre good shyp sayles!”
  And thus they say among.
“Hale in the wartake!” “hit shal be done.”
“Steward! couer the boorde anone,
And set bred and salt therone,
  And tary nat to long.”
Then cometh oone and seyth, “be mery;
Ye shall haue a storme or a pery.”
“Holde thow thy pese! thow canst no whery
  Thow medlyst wondyr sore.”
Thys mene whyle the pylgryms ly,
And haue theyr bowlys fast theym by,
And cry aftyr hote maluesy,
  “Thow helpe for to restore.”

[VERSE 6]
And som wold haue a saltyd tost,
Ffor they myght ete neyther sode ne rost;
A man myght sone pay for theyr cost,
  As for oo day or twayne.
Som layde theyr bookys on theyr kne,
And rad so long they myght nat se;
“Allas! myne hede wolle cleue on thre!”
  Thus seyth another certayne.

[VERSE 7]
Then commeth owre owner lyke a lorde,
And speketh many a Royall worde,
And dresseth hym to the hygh borde,
  To see alle thyng be welle.
Anone he calleth a carpentere,
And byddyth hym bryng with hym hys gere,
To make the cabans here and there,
  With many a febylle celle.
A sak of strawe were there ryght good,
Ffor som must lyg theym in theyr hood;
I had as lefe be in the wood,
  Without mete or drynk;
For when that we shall go to bedde,
The pumpe was nygh oure beddes hede,
A man were as good to be dede
  As smell therof the stynk!

--- TITLE: John Dory [item: PG76941-pg76941-005]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 4653-4691
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
As it fell on a holy-day, and upon an holy-tide-a,
John Dory bought him an ambling nag, to Paris for to ride-a:
And, when John Dory to Paris was come, a little before the gate-a,
John Dory was fitted, the porter was witted, to let him in
    thereat-a.

[VERSE 2]
The first man that John Dory did meet, was good King John of
    France-a;
John Dory could well of his courtesie, but fell down in a trance-a:

[VERSE 3]
‘A pardon, a pardon, my liege and my king, for my merie men and for
    me-a;
And all the churles in merie England, Ile bring them all bound to
    thee-a.’
And Nicholl was then a Cornish man, a little beside Bohide-a.
And he mande forth a good blacke barke, with fiftie good oares on a
    side-a.

[VERSE 4]
‘Run up, my boy, unto the maine-top, and looke what thou canst
    spie-a.’
‘Who ho! who ho! a goodly ship I do see, I trow it be John Dory-a.’

[VERSE 5]
They hoist their sailes, both top and top, the meisseine and all was
    tride-a;
And every man stood to his lot, whatever should betide-a.
The roring cannons then were plide, and dub-a-dub went the drumme-a;
The braying trumpets lowd they cride to courage both all and some-a.

[VERSE 6]
The grapling-hooks were brought at length, the browne bill and the
    sword-a;
John Dory at length, for all his strength, was clapt fast under
    board-a.

--- TITLE: The Mariner’S Song [item: PG76941-pg76941-006]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 4692-4726
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Lustely, lustely, lustely let us saile forthe;
The winde trim doth serve us, it blows from the north.

[VERSE 2]
All thinges we have ready and nothing we want
  To furnish our ship that rideth hereby;
Victuals and weapons thei be nothing skant,
  Like worthie mariners ourselves we will trie.
                            Lustely, lustely, &c.

[VERSE 3]
Her flagges be new trimmed, set flanting alofte,
  Our ship for swift swimmyng, oh! she doth excel;
We fear no enemies, we have escaped them ofte;
  Of all ships that swimmeth she beareth the bell.
                            Lustely, lustely, &c.

[VERSE 4]
And here is a maister excelleth in skill,
  And our maister’s mate he is not to seeke;
And here is a boteswaine will do his good will,
  And here is a ship, boy, we never had leak.
                            Lustely, lustely, &c.

[VERSE 5]
If fortune then faile not, and our next voiage prove,
  We will return merely, and make good cheare,
And holde all together as friends link’d in love;
  The cannes shall be filled with wine, ale, and beer.
                            Lustely, lustely, &c.

--- TITLE: The Sailor’S Onely Delight [item: PG76941-pg76941-009]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 4953-5032
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
The George-Aloe and the Sweep-stake too,
    With hey, with hoe, for and a nony no;
O they were merchant-men and bound for Safee,
    And alongst the coast of Barbary.

[VERSE 2]
The George-Aloe to anchor came,
But the jolly Sweepstake kept on her way.

[VERSE 3]
They had not sayled leagues two or three,
But they met with a Frenchman of war upon the sea.
‘All haile, all haile, you lusty gallants,
Of whence is your fair ship, or whither are you bound?’

[VERSE 4]
‘We are Englishmen and bound for Safee,
Of whence is your fair ship, or whither are you bound?’

[VERSE 5]
‘Amaine, amaine, you gallant Englishman,’
‘Come, you French swads, and strike down your sayle.’

[VERSE 6]
They laid us aboord on the star-boord side,
And they overthrew us into the sea so wide.

[VERSE 7]
When tidings to the George-Aloe came,
That the jolly Sweep-stake by a Frenchman was tane.

[VERSE 8]
‘To top! to top, thou little ship-boy!
And see if this Frenchman of war thou canst descry.’

[VERSE 9]
‘A sayle, a sayle, under our lee,
Yea, and another under her obey.’

[VERSE 10]
‘Weigh anchor! weigh anchor, O jolly boat-swain,
We wil take this Frenchman if we can.’

[VERSE 11]
We had not sayled leagues two or three,
But we met the Frenchman of war upon the sea,

[VERSE 12]
‘All haile, all haile, you lusty gallants,
Of whence is your faire ship and whither are you bound?’

[VERSE 13]
‘O, wee are merchant-men and bound for Safee.’
‘I, and wee are French-men, and war upon the sea.

[VERSE 14]
‘Amaine, amaine, you English dogges!’
‘Come aboard, you French rogue, and strike down your sailes.’

[VERSE 15]
The first good shot the George-Aloe (made),
He made the French-men’s hearts sore afraid.

[VERSE 16]
The second shot the George-Aloe did afford,
He struck their mainmast over the board.
‘Have mercy, have mercy, you brave Englishmen,’
‘O what have you done with our brethren,
    As they sayled in Barbarie?’

[VERSE 17]
‘Wee laid them aboard on the starboard side,
And we threw them into the sea so wide.’

[VERSE 18]
‘Such mercy as you have shewed unto them,
Then the like mercy shall you have againe.

[VERSE 19]
Wee laid them aboard on the larboard side,
And we threw them into the sea so wide.

[VERSE 20]
Lord! how it grieves our hearts full sore,
To see the drowned French-men swim along the shore.

[VERSE 21]
Now, gallant sea-men all, adieu,
With hey, with hoe, for and a nony no;
This is the latest newes that I can write to you,
    To England’s coast from Barbarie.

--- TITLE: The Seaman’S Song Of Captain Ward, The Famous Pyrate Of The World, And An English-Man Born [item: PG76941-pg76941-010]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 5033-5146
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Gallants, you must understand,
  Captain Ward of England,
A pyrate and a rover on the sea,
  Of late a simple fisherman
  In the merrry town of Feversham,
Grows famous in the world now every day.

[VERSE 2]
  From the Bay of Plimouth
  Sayled he towards the south,
With many more of courage and of might;
  Christian princes have but few
  Such seamen, if that he were true,
And would but for his King and country fight.

[VERSE 3]
  Lusty Ward adventurously
  In the Straights of Barbary
Did make the Turkish gallyes for to shake.
  Bouncing cannons fiery hot
  Spared not the Turks one jot,
But of their lives great slaughter he did make.

[VERSE 4]
  The islanders of Malta,
  With argosies upon the sea,
Most proudly braved Ward unto his face
  But soon their pride was overthrown,
  And their treasures made his own,
And all their men brought to a wofull case.

[VERSE 5]
  The wealthy ships of Venice
  Afforded him great riches;
Both gold and silver won he by his sword.
  Stately Spain and Portugal
  Against him dare not bear up sail,
But gave him all the title of a lord.

[VERSE 6]
  Golden-seated Candy,
  Famous France and Italy,
With all the countries of the Eastern parts,
  If once their ships his pride with-stood,
  They surely all were cloath’d in blood,
Such cruelty was plac’d within their hearts.

[VERSE 7]
  The riches he hath gain’d,
  And by bloodshed obtained,
Well may suffice for to maintain a king;
  His fellows all were valiant wights,
  Fit to be made prince’s knights,
But that their lives do base dishonors bring.

[VERSE 8]
  This wicked-gotten treasure
  Doth him but little pleasure;
The land consumes what they have got by sea,
  In drunkenness and letchery,
  Filthy sins of sodomy,
Their evil-gotten goods do waste away.

[VERSE 9]
  Such as live by thieving
  Have seldome-times good ending,
As by the deeds of Captain Ward is shown:
  Being drunk amongst his drabs,
  His nearest friend he sometimes stabs;
Such wickednesse within his heart is grown.

[VERSE 10]
  When stormy tempest riseth,
  The Causer he despiseth,
Still denies to pray unto the Lord.
  He feareth neither God nor devil,
  His deeds are bad, his thoughts are evil,
His onley trust is still upon his sword.

[VERSE 11]
  Men of his own country
  He still abuseth vilely;
Some back to back are cast into the waves;
  Some are hewn in pieces small,
  Some are shot against a wall;
A slender number of their lives he saves.

[VERSE 12]
  Of truth it is reported
  That he is strongly guarded
By Turks that are not of a good belief;
  Wit and reasons tell them
  He trusteth not his country-men,
He shews the right condition of a thief.

[VERSE 13]
  At Tunis in Barbary
  Now he buildeth stately
A gallant palace and a royal place,
  Decked with delights most trim,
  Fitter for a prince than him,
The which at last will prove to his disgrace.

[VERSE 14]
  To make the world to wonder,
  This captain is commander
Of four-and-twenty ships of sayl,
  To bring in treasure from the sea
  Into the markets every day:
The which the Turks do buy up without fail.

[VERSE 15]
  His name and state so mounteth,
  These countrey-men accounteth
Him equal to the nobles of that land;
  But these his honours we shall find
  Shortly blown up with the wind,
Or prove like letters written in the sand.

--- TITLE: The Song Of Dansekar The Dutchman [item: PG76941-pg76941-011]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 5147-5251
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Sing we sea-men, now and than,
  Of Dansekar the Dutchman,
Whose gallant mind hath won him great renown;
  To live on land he counts it base,
  But seeks to purchase greater grace
By roving on the ocean up and down.
  His heart is so aspiring,
  That now his chief desiring
Is for to win himself a worthy name;
  The land hath far too little ground,
  The sea is of a larger bound,
And of a greater dignity and fame.

[VERSE 2]
  Now many a worthy gallant,
  Of courage now most valiant,
With him hath put their fortunes to the sea;
  All the world about have heard
  Of Dansekar and Captain Ward,
And of their proud adventures every day.

[VERSE 3]
  There is not any kingdom,
  In Turkey or in Christendom,
But by these pyrates have received loss;
  Merchant-men of every land
  Do daily in great danger stand,
And fear do much the ocean main to cross.

[VERSE 4]
  They make children fatherless,
  Woful widows in distresse;
In shedding blood they take too much delight;
  Fathers they bereave of sons,
  Regarding neither cries nor moans,
So much they joy to see a bloody fight.

[VERSE 5]
  They count it gallant bearing
  To hear the cannons roaring,
And musket shot to rattle in the sky;
  Their glories would be at the highest
  To fight against the foes of Christ,
And such as do our Christian faith deny.

[VERSE 6]
  But their cursed villanies,
  And their bloody pyracies,
Are chiefly bent against our Christian friends;
  Some Christians so delight in evils
  That they become the sons of divels,
And for the same have many shameful ends.

[VERSE 7]
  England suffers danger
  As well as any stranger;
Nations are alike unto this company;
  Many English merchant-men,
  And of London now and then,
Have tasted of their vile extremity.

[VERSE 8]
  London’s Elizabeth
  Of late these rovers taken hath,
A ship well laden with rich merchandize;
  The nimble Pearl and Charity,
  All ships of gallant bravery,
Are by these pyrates made a lawful prize.

[VERSE 9]
  The Trojan of London,
  With other ships many a one,
Hath stooped sail, and yielded out of hand,
  (These pyrates they have shed their bloods,
  And the Turks have bought their goods),
Being all too weak their power to withstand.

[VERSE 10]
  Of Hull the Bonaventer,
  Which was a great frequenter
And passer of the Straits to Barbary,
  Both ship and men late taken were
  By Pyrates Ward and Dansekar,
And brought by them into captivity.

[VERSE 11]
  English Ward and Dansekar
  Begin greatly now to jar
About the true dividing of their goods;
  Both ships and soldiers gather head,
  Dansekar from Ward is fled:
So full of pride and malice are their bloods.

[VERSE 12]
  Ward doth only promise
  To keep about rich Tunis,
And be commander of those Turkish seas;
  But valiant Dutch-land Dansekar
  Doth hover neer unto Argier,
And there his threat’ning colours now displays.

[VERSE 13]
  These pyrates thus divided,
  By God is sure provided
In secret sort to work each other’s woe;
  Such wicked courses cannot stand,
  The Divel thus puts in his hand,
And God will give them soon an overthrow.

--- TITLE: The Famous Sea-Fight Between Captain Ward And The Rainbow [item: PG76941-pg76941-012]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 5252-5320
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Strike up, you lusty gallants, with musick and sound of drum:
For we have descry’d a rover upon the sea is come;
His name is Captain Ward, right well it doth appear
There has not been such a rover found out this thousand year;

[VERSE 2]
For he hath sent unto our King, the sixth of January,
Desiring that he might come in, with all his company;
‘And if your King will let me come, till I my tale have told,
I will bestow for my ransome full thirty tun of gold.’

[VERSE 3]
‘O nay! O nay!’ then said our King, ‘O nay, this may not be,
To yield to such a rover my self will not agree;
He hath deceiv’d the French-man, likewise the King of Spain,
And how can he be true to me, that hath been false to twain?’

[VERSE 4]
With that our King provided a ship of worthy fame;
Rainbow she is called, if you would know her name.
Now the gallant Rainbow she rowes upon the sea,
Five hundred gallant seamen to bear her company.

[VERSE 5]
The Dutch-man and the Spaniard she made them for to flye,
Also the bonny French-man, as she met him on the sea.
When as this gallant Rainbow, did come where Ward did lye,
Where is the captain of this ship?’ this gallant Rainbow did cry.

[VERSE 6]
‘O that am I,’ says Captain Ward, ‘there’s no man bids me lye;
And if thou art the King’s fair ship thou art welcome unto me.’
‘I’le tell thee what,’ says Rainbow, ‘our King is in great grief
That thou should’st lye upon the sea and play the arrant thief,

[VERSE 7]
‘And will not let our merchants’ ships pass, as they did before;
Such tydings to our King is come, which grieves his heart full sore.’
With that this gallant Rainbow she shot, out of her pride,
Full fifty gallant brass pieces, charged on every side.

[VERSE 8]
And yet these gallant shooters prevailed not a pin;
Though they were brass on the out-side brave Ward was steel within.
‘Shoot on, shoot on!’ says Captain Ward; ‘your sport well pleaseth
    me;
And he that first gives over, shall yield unto the sea.

[VERSE 9]
‘I never wrong’d an English ship, but Turk and King of Spain,
For and the jovial Dutch-man, as I met on the main.
If I had known your King but one two-years before,
I would have saved brave Essex life, whose death did grieve me sore.

[VERSE 10]
‘Go, tell the King of England, go tell him thus from me,
If he reign king of all the land, I will reign king at sea.’
With that the gallant Rainbow shot, and shot, and shot in vain,
And left the rover’s company, and home return’d again.

[VERSE 11]
‘O Royal King of England, your ship’s returned again;
For Wards ship is so strong it never will be ta’ne.’
‘O everlasting!’ says our King, ‘I have lost jewels three,
Which would have gone into the seas and brought proud Ward to me!

[VERSE 12]
‘The first was Lord Clifford, Earl of Cumberland;
The second was the Lord Mountjoy, as you shall understand;
The third was brave Essex, from field would never flee;
Which would ’a gone unto the seas and brought proud Ward to me!’

--- TITLE: The Lamentable Cries Of At Least 1500 Christians [item: PG76941-pg76941-013]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 5321-5415
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Not many moones have from their silver bowes
Shot light through all the world, since those sworne foes
To God and all good men ... that hell-borne crew
Of pirates (to whome there’s no villanies new),
Those halfe-Turkes and halfe Christians, who now ride
Like sea-gods (on rough billows in their pride),
Those renegadoes, who (their Christ denying)
Are worse than Turkes, Turkes them in heart defying;
These, these are they, that have from Christians torne,
Of ships, sixescore but one, and the men borne
(To th’ number of a thousand) to th’ Turkes shore,
All they being slaves now tugging at the oare.
Count from what time the worthy Mansfield came
From that divels den (Argiers).... Just since that flame
Of warre went out at sea, in that short space
From thence till now these thieves have held in chase
All ships which pass’d the Straights of Gibraltar,
To rob or sinke them; were they men of warre,
Merchants, or others; and when worst they thrive
And nothing get, yet get they men alive.
O wretched state of Christian soules so taken!
To looke upon whose torments would awaken
Tyrants, to thrust their armes up, through their graves,
To gard from blowes these Christian galley-slaves.
They that could safely stand but on the shoare
To view a sea-fight, heare the cannons roare,
See Turkes boord English ships, whilest Englishmen
Like lyons fight, and fling them o’re.... But when
Numbers of big-boan’d runnagates so swarme,
That not one man of ours dare lift an arme
At a Turkes head, the ship with blood imbrude,
And over-mastered with damn’d multitude,
Should any stand so, and get off unwounded,
They would, to see this, bee with griefe confounded:
But on these following lines fasten your eyes,
Your selves may draw foorth all their miseries.
Being boorded so, and rob’d, then are they tide
On chaines, and drag’d t’ Argiers, to feede the pride
Of a Mahumetan dog (eight in a row)
(Each eighth man to the Argier king must goe),
And th’ eighth part of what’s tane is still his prize;
What men he leaves are any-ones who buyes
And bids most for them, for they then are led
To market, and like beasts sold by the head,
Their masters having liberty by law
To strike, kick, starve them, yet to make them draw
In yoakes, like oxen, and if dead they beate them,
Out are they throwne for beasts and ravens to eate them
He that’s condemn’d to th’ oare hath first his face,
Eyebrowes, and head close shaven (for more disgrace
Cannot betide a Christian). Then, being stript
To th’ girdle (as when roagues are to be whipt),
Chain’d are they to the seates where they sit rowing,
Five in a row together; a Turke going
On a large plancke between them, and though their eyes
Are ready to start out with pulling, he cryes
‘Worke, worke, you Christian curres,’ and though none needs
One blow for loytering, yet his bare back bleeds,
And riseth up in bunches, which the Turke
With a bulls-pizzle gives him, crying still, ‘Worke,
Worke, dog,’ whilest some so faint, at th’ oare they dye,
Being cast (like dogs) over-boord presently.
Their slavery done at Sea, then are they laid
In dungeons, worse than jayles, poorely arraid,
Fed with course horse-bread, water for their drinke,
And such sometimes puddles cannot worser stinke.
Then if upon a Turkish roague they frowne,
Or give him a crosse word, held are they downe
Oth’ ground upon their backs, whilst on the rim
Of their bare bellies they are forc’d from him
To beare four hundred blowes: their soles oth’ feet
And shinnes like payment now and then doe meet.
Why are the Turkes thus cruell, but to draw
Christians from Christ to their Mahumetan law?
You, who at home in golden pleasures dance,
Wasting both noones and nights in dalliance,
O when these groanes of Christians pierce your eares
To free them, give your charity, and your teares,
Whilst you that are our Christian Princes stil’d
(All jarres amongst your selves being reconcil’d)
Into the field with one knit army come,
To kill this lyon that thus teares Christendome.

--- TITLE: The Honour Of Bristol [item: PG76941-pg76941-014]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 5416-5503
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Attend you and give ear awhile, and you shall understand
Of a battel fought upon the seas, by a ship of brave command;
The fight it was so famous, that all men’s heart doth fill,
And makes them cry, ‘To sea, with the Angel Gabriel!’

[VERSE 2]
The lusty ship of Bristol sail’d out adventurously,
Against the foes of England, their strength with them to try;
Well victual’d, rig’d, and man’d, and good provision still:
Which makes men cry, ‘To sea, with the Angel Gabriel!’

[VERSE 3]
The captain, famous Netheway, so was he call’d by name;
The master’s name John Mines, a man of noted fame;
The gunner Thomas Watson, a man of perfect skill:
With other valiant hearts, in the Angel Gabriel.

[VERSE 4]
They waving up and down the seas, upon the ocean main:
‘It is not long ago,’ quoth they, ‘since England fought with Spain!
Would we with them might meet, our minds for to fulfill;
We would play a noble bout with our Angel Gabriel.’

[VERSE 5]
They had no sooner spoken, but straight appear’d in sight
Three lusty Spanish vessels, of warlike force and might;
With bloody resolution they sought our men to spill,
And vow’d to make a prize of our Angel Gabriel.

[VERSE 6]
Then first came up their admiral, themselves for to advance;
In her she bore full forty-eight piece of ordinance;
The next that then came near us was their vice-admiral,
Which shot most furiously at our Angel Gabriel.

[VERSE 7]
Our gallant ship had in her full forty fighting men:
With twenty pieces of ordnance we play’d about them then;
And with powder, shot, and bullets we did imploy them still,
And thus began the fight with our Angel Gabriel.

[VERSE 8]
Our captain to our master said, ‘Take courage, master bold;’
The master to the seamen said, ‘Stand fast, my hearts of gold;’
The gunner unto all the rest, ‘Brave hearts, be valiant still;
Let us fight in the defence of our Angel Gabriel!’

[VERSE 9]
Then we gave them a broadside, which shot their mast asunder,
And tore the bowsprit of their ship, which made the Spaniards wonder;
And caused them for to cry, with voices loud and shrill,
‘Help! help! or else we sink, by the Angel Gabriel.’

[VERSE 10]
Yet desperately they boarded us, for all our valiant shot;
Three-score of their best fighting-men upon our decks were got,
And then at their entrance full thirty we did kill,
And thus we clear’d the decks of the Angel Gabriel.
With that their three ships boarded us again with might and main,
But still our noble Englishmen cry’d out, ‘A fig for Spain!’
Though seven times they boarded us, at last we shew’d our skill,
And made them feel the force of our Angel Gabriel.

[VERSE 11]
Seven hours this fight continued, and many brave men lay dead,
With purple gore and Spanish blood the sea was coloured red;
Five hundred of their men we there outright did kill;
And many more were maim’d by the Angel Gabriel.

[VERSE 12]
They seeing of these bloody spoils, the rest made haste away.
For why? they saw it was no boot any longer for to stay;
Then they fled into Cales, and there they must lye still,
For they never more will dare to meet our Angel Gabriel.

[VERSE 13]
We had within our English ship but onely three men slain;
And five men hurt, the which, I hope, will soon be well again;
At Bristol we were landed, and let us praise God still,
That thus hath blest our men and our Angel Gabriel.

[VERSE 14]
Now let me not forget to speak of the gift given by the owner
Of the Angel Gabriel, that many years has known her;
Two hundred pounds in coyn and plate he gave with free good will
Unto them that bravely fought in the Angel Gabriel.

--- TITLE: Neptune To England [item: PG76941-pg76941-015]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 5504-5536
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Of thee, great State, the god of waves
In equall wrongs assistance craves,
                      Defend thyselfe and mee:
For if ore seas there be no sway,
My godhead cleane is tane away,
                      The scepter pluckt from thee.
Such as ore seas all sovereigntie oppose,
Though seeming friends, to both are truly foes.

[VERSE 2]
If little Venice brings alone
Such waves to her subjection,
                      As in the Gulfe doe stirre,
What then should great Britannia please,
But rule as ladie ore all seas,
                      And thou as queen of her?
For sea-dominion may as well be gain’d
By new acquests, as by descent maintain’d.

[VERSE 3]
Goe on, great state, and make it knowne,
Thou never wilt forsake thine owne,
                      Nor from thy purpose start:
But that thou wilt thy power dilate,
Since narrow seas are found too straight
                      For thy capacious heart.
So shall thy rule, and mine, have large extent:
Yet not so large, as just and permanent.

--- TITLE: On His Majesties Fleet [item: PG76941-pg76941-016]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 5537-5577
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Cease now the talke of wonders, nothing rare
Of floateing ilandes, castles in the aire,
Of wooden walls, graves walkeing, flieing steedes,
Or Trojan horse. The present truth exceeds
Those ancient fables; floating iles great store,
Sent from the British Ile, now guard her shore,
And castles strong without foundation stande
More safe on waters pavement then on lande.
Now wooden walles defend our walles of rocke;
These walles are cittyes too; tooke from the block
Arise those christned frames, which are the health
And moddle of a vaster Commonwealth;
Beyond the Kentish stratagem now ghosts
Of trees not greene doe walk about our coasts,
Which humane art hath made move quick, by death
Inur’d to motion, taught to feed on breath.
Now winged steeds with bridles plac’d behinde,
Leaving no print, accompany the winde,
Their bowells greate with sonns of Mars doth groane
To be delivered into action.
Ride on, Arts liveing creatures, flie and swell
Your wings like angry swans, while wee that dwell
On shore, with prayer and fame encrease the gale
Which Heaven shall breath into each pregnant saile.
Powre out the language of a chastning Jove
That speakes in thunder here, like him above.
Cannot your Lion roare and act her king?
Is shee with all her Whelpes not swift to bringe
Her pray into her den? Is not your Rose
Worth lilies three, or any flower that growes?
Your Honour (which is admirall) maintaine;
She leades you forth, come home to her againe.
For sea and fish, if tempests rise, bee free.
Give them to what they love, that troublers bee.

--- TITLE: Upon The Great Ship [item: PG76941-pg76941-017]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 5578-5734
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Old Paul’s steeple, fare thee well,
Thy famous building Ile not tell,
Of that thy lofty little bell
                                Shall ring.
But I am in another vaine,
Now you shall heare a merry straine,
It is of Royal Soveraigne
                                I sing.

[VERSE 2]
I meane the ship so lately built,
Without, within soe richly gilt;
O never man saw rapier hilt
                                Soe shine.
I think there’s none since Noah’s Flood
Was ever like to prove soe good;
You never saw thing made of wood
                                Soe fine.

[VERSE 3]
Edgar sitts horse, in glorious wise
As glorious artists could devise,
And under seven kings prostrate lyes.
                                I’me told
His horse with mettle soe abounds
That he shall shortly scowre the Downes,
And winne, Ile hold, a hundred pounds
                                Of gold.

[VERSE 4]
To tell you of her bredth, her length,
Her height, her depth, her bulk, her strength,
Her anchor’s weight too, and the length
                                Oth’ cable,
Her guns, her tackle and the rest
Quæ nunc proscribere longum est,
It might be counted for a ieast
                                Or fable;

[VERSE 5]
For there be very few will guesse
Her half a mile or little lesse,
Her lanthorne to feast forty messe
                                Unbidd,
Her mast for to be thrice as high
As Grantham steeple. If I lye
Ask them that saw her, pray, for I
                                Nere did.

[VERSE 6]
To see how lasses flock each day,
And leave their maydenheads by th’ way,
I doubt that some will shortly pay
                                Dearely;
And most men wives will alsoe goe
To ’t whe’r their hussbands will or noe
To meet a freind, I don’t say soe,
                                Not I.

[VERSE 7]
There’s many more will see this sight;
Some call their wives, and they doe right,
But some with others to delight
                                Are bent.
Thus good and bad and midling some,
To see this ship, to Woolwich come,
This wonder of all Christendome
                                And Kent.

[VERSE 8]
Kent was never conquered yet,
Kent was thought a place most fitt
To build this goodly arke in it,
                                Soe stronge.
Kent and men of Kent have showne
By sea, by land, that of their owne
Which other countries have not knowne
                                Soe long.

[VERSE 9]
Yet a word or two in merriment
To cheer up some were discontent,
And thought theire mony had bin lent
                                In vaine;
But now the truth they plainely see,
They all in one consent agree
To double it if need shalbe
                                Againe.

[VERSE 10]
She will be Neptune’s greatest grace;
She vows our chiefest foes to chase,
And Triton with triforked mace
                                Doth sweare
Noe Remora there shall her stay,
Leviathan must give her way,
And all the divills that this day
                                Dwell there.

[VERSE 11]
The syrens sitt and sweetly sing,
And hold it for a happy thing
That now they shall enioy the King
                                Oth’ mayne,
And say it’s a most Christian worke
To curb the Pope and scourge the Turke,
And ferret those that theeving lurke
                                Neer Spaine.

[VERSE 12]
Our freinds are glad and mirth doe make,
Our foes are sad, their hearts doe quake,
Soe some doe laugh, and some doe shake
                                For woe,
And I amongst the rest make sport,
Singing to you in civill sort,
And if you have not thank’d me for’t
                                Then doe.

[VERSE 13]
God blesse King Charles with length of daies,
That doth deserve immortal praise,
In this and many thousand waies
                                Our guide.
God blesse the Queen and ship so tall,
God blesse the great, God blesse the small,
The blade that made this song and all
                                Beside.

--- TITLE: The Jovial Marriner; Or, The Sea-Man’S Renown [item: PG76941-pg76941-019]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 5816-5912
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Sail forth, bold sea-men, plough the liquid main;
Fear neither storms nor pirats, strive for gain;
Whilst others sleep at home in a whole skin
Your brave adventures shall great honours win.

[VERSE 2]
I am a jovial marriner: our calling is well known;
We trade with many a foreigner to purchase high renown;
We serve our country faithfully, and bring home store of gold;
We do our business manfully, for we are free and bold.
      A sea-man hath a valiant heart, and bears a noble minde;
      He scorneth once to shrink or start for any stormy wind.

[VERSE 3]
’Tis known what hardships we endure abroad upon the seas,
Whilst others sleep at home secure, and spend their time in ease;
We seldom dare lie down to rest, lest danger should ensue;
Our heads with care is sore opprest: beleeve me, it is true!
      A sea-man hath a valiant heart, etc.

[VERSE 4]
A cowardly spirit must not think to prove a sea-man bold,
For to be sure he may not shrink in dangers manifold;
When sea-fights happen on the main, and dreadful cannons rore,
Then all men fight, or else be slain and braggarts proud look poor.
      A sea-man hath a valiant heart, etc.
’Tis sea-men stout that doth deserve both honour and renown;
In perils great we may not swerve, though Neptune seem to frown;
If once his curled front we spy, drencht in the foamy brine,
Then each man doth his business ply, there’s none that doth repine.
      A sea-man hath a valiant heart, etc.

[VERSE 5]
When angry billows brush the skye, most hideous to behold,
Then up our ships are tost on high, and with the waves are roull’d;
When tempest fierce our sails doth tear, and rends the masts asunder,
O! then we have great cause to fear, or else it were a wonder.
      A sea-man hath a valiant heart, etc.

[VERSE 6]
Great rocks which lye amongst the waves do threaten us with death,
And many sea-men finde their graves in sands which are beneath;
To see the masts of ships appear, which hath been cast away,
Would make a land-man dye with fear, ’tis best at home to stay.
      A sea-man hath a valiant heart, and bears a noble minde, etc.

[VERSE 7]
Brave England hath been much inricht by art of navigation;
Great store of wealth we home have fetched for to adorn our nation:
Our merchants still we do supply with traffick that is rare;
Then, sea-men, cast your caps on high, we are without compare.
      A sea-man hath a valiant heart, and bears a noble minde;
      He scorneth once to shrink or start for any stormy wind.
Who should the ladies’ pallats please, with spices of the best,
If sea-men all should take their ease, and stay at home to rest?
Our gallants they would finde a want of silks to make them fine,
And tearing boyes no more would rant if once they wanted wine.
      A sea-man hath a valiant heart, etc.

[VERSE 8]
Our land it would invaded be if sea-men were not stout;
We let our friends come in on sea, and keep our foes without;
Our privilege upon the seas we bravely do maintain,
And can enlarge it when we please in Royal Charles his reign.
      A sea-man hath a valiant heart, etc.

[VERSE 9]
Such countries as do lie remote doth tremble at our fame,
For we have taught them all to note ’tis England bears the name:
In foreign parts where ere we come our valour is well known,
What ere they be they dare not mumm, if we say all’s our own.
      A sea-man hath a valiant heart, etc.
When as our ships with merchandize are safely come to shore,
No men like us under the skies to drink, to sing, and rore;
Good wine and beer we freely tope, until the ground look blew:
We value neither Turk nor Pope, we are a jovial crew.
      A sea-man hath a valiant heart, etc.

[VERSE 10]
We kiss our wives when we return, who long for us did wait,
And he that’s single need not mourn, he cannot want a mate:
Young women still are wondrous kinde to sea-men in their need;
And sure it shows a courteous minde to do a friendly deed.
      A sea-man hath a valiant heart, etc.

[VERSE 11]
With pretty, courteous, dainty knacks we please the females well,
We know what longing women lacks, most surely we can tell;
A sea-man is a cock o’ th’ game, young maidens find it true;
We never are so much to blame to let them want their due.
      A sea-man hath a valiant heart, etc.

[VERSE 12]
Thus, gallant sea-men, I have spread abroad your high renown,
Which shall survive when you are dead, and gain a lasting crown:
Your praise to future ages shall most gloriously appear;
Then courage, noble sea-men all, ’tis you I love most dear.
      A sea-man hath a valiant heart, and bears a noble minde
      He scorneth once to shrink or start for any stormy wind.

--- TITLE: Neptune’S Raging Fury; Or, The Gallant Seaman’S Sufferings [item: PG76941-pg76941-020]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 5913-5987
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
You gentlemen of England, that lives at home at ease,
Full little do you think upon the dangers of the seas:
Give ear unto the marriners, and they will plainly show,
The cares and the fears when the stormy winds do blow.

[VERSE 2]
All you that will be seamen must bear a valiant heart,
For when you come upon the seas you must not think to start,
Nor once to be faint-hearted in hail, rain, or snow,
Nor to shrink, nor to shrink when the stormy winds do blow.

[VERSE 3]
The bitter storms and tempests poor seamen must endure,
Both day and night, with many a fright, we seldom rest secure;
Our sleep it is disturbed with visions strange to know,
And with dreams on the streams, when the stormy winds do blow.

[VERSE 4]
In claps of roaring thunder which darkness doth enforce,
We often find our ship to stray beyond our wonted course,
Which causeth great distractions, and sinks our hearts full low;
’Tis in vain to complain when the stormy winds do blow.
Sometimes in Neptune’s bosom our ship is tost in waves
And every man expecting the sea to be their graves:
Then up aloft she mounteth and down again so low;
’Tis with waves, oh! with waves, when the stormy winds do blow.

[VERSE 5]
Then down again we fall to prayer with all our might and thought;
When refuge all doth fail us ’tis that must bear us out;
To God we call for succour, for He it is, we know,
That must aid us and save us when the stormy winds do blow.
The lawyer and the usurer that sits in gown of fur,
In closets warm, can take no harm, abroad they need not stir;
When winter fierce with cold doth pierce, and beats with hail and
    snow,
We are sure to endure when the stormy winds do blow.

[VERSE 6]
We bring home costly merchandise, and jewels of great price
To serve our English gallantry with many a rare device;
To please the English gallantry our pains we freely show,
For we toyl and we moile when the stormy winds do blow.

[VERSE 7]
We sometimes sail to the Indies to fetch home spices rare,
Sometimes again to France and Spain for wines beyond compare
Whilst gallants are carousing in taverns on a row
Then we sweep o’er the deep when the stormy winds do blow.

[VERSE 8]
When tempests are blown over, and greatest fears are past,
In weather fair and temperate air, we straight lie down to rest:
But when the billows tumble and waves do furious grow
Then we rouse, up we rouse when the stormy winds do blow.

[VERSE 9]
If enemies oppose us, when England is at wars
With any foreign nations we fear not wounds and scars;
Our roaring guns shall teach ’em our valour for to know,
Whilst they reel in the keel when the stormy winds do blow.

[VERSE 10]
We are no cowardly shrinkers, but Englishmen true bred;
We’ll play our parts like valiant hearts, and never fly for dread;
We’ll ply our business nimbly, where’er we come or go
With our mates, to the Straits, when the stormy winds do blow.

[VERSE 11]
Then courage all, brave mariners, and never be dismayed;
Whilst we have bold adventurers we ne’er shall want a trade;
Our merchants will employ us to fetch them wealth, we know;
Then be bold, work for gold, when the stormy winds do blow.

[VERSE 12]
When we return in safety with wages for our pains
The tapster and the vintner will help to share our gains;
We’ll call for liquor roundly and pay before we go,
Then we’ll roar on the shore when the stormy winds do blow.

--- TITLE: The Famous Fight At Malago; Or, The Englishmens Victory Over The Spaniards [item: PG76941-pg76941-021]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 5988-6065
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Where ever English seamen goes
They are a terror to their foes.

[VERSE 2]
Come all you brave sailors that sails on the main,
I’ll tell you of a fight that was lately in Spain;
And of five sail of frigats bound to Malago
For to fight the proud Spaniards; our orders was so.

[VERSE 3]
There was the Henry and Ruby, and the Antelope also,
The Grey-hound and the Bryan, for fire-ships must go;
But so bravely we weighed, and played our parts,
That we made the proud Spaniards to quake in their hearts.

[VERSE 4]
Then we came to an anchor so nigh to the mould;
‘Methinks you proud English do grow very bold!’
But we came to an anchor so near to the town
That some of their churches we soon battered down.

[VERSE 5]
They hung out their flag of truce, for to know our intent,
And they sent out their long-boat to know what we meant;
But our captain he answered them bravely, it was so,
‘For to burn all your shipping before we do go.’

[VERSE 6]
‘For to burn all our shipping? You must us excuse;
’Tis not five sail of frigats shall make us to muse!’--
But we burnt all their shipping, and their gallies also;
And we left in the city full many a widow.

[VERSE 7]
‘Come then,’ says our captain, ‘let’s fire at the church!’
And down came their belfrey, which grieved them much;
And down came the steeple, which standeth so high,
Which made the proud Spaniards to the nunnery fly.

[VERSE 8]
So great a confusion we made in the town
That their lofty buildings came tumbling down;
Their wives and their children, for help they did cry,
But none could relieve them, though danger was nigh.

[VERSE 9]
The flames and the smoak so increased their woe
That they knew not whither to run or to go;
Some to shun the fire leapt into the flood,
And there they did perish in water and mud.

[VERSE 10]
Our guns we kept firing, still shooting amain,
Whilst many a proud Spaniard was on the place slain;
The rest, being amazed, for succour did cry,
But all was in vain, they had no where to fly.

[VERSE 11]
At length being forced, they thought it most fit
Unto the brave English-men for to submit;
And so a conclusion at last we did make
Upon such conditions as was fit to take.

[VERSE 12]
The Spanish Armado did England no harm,
’Twas but a bravado, to give us alarm;
But with our five frigats we did them bumbast,
And made them of English-men’s valour to taste.

[VERSE 13]
When this noble victory we did obtain,
Then home we returned to England again,
Where we were received with welcomes of joy,
Because with five frigats we did them destroy.

--- TITLE: The Valiant Seaman’S Congratulation To His Sacred Majesty King Charles Ii [item: PG76941-pg76941-023]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 6255-6325
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Great Charles, your English seamen upon our bended knee,
Present ourselves as freemen, unto your Majesty,
Beseeching God to blesse you where-ever that you go,
So we pray, night and day, when the stormy winds do blow.

[VERSE 2]
In darkest nights, or shipwracks, alwayes we are on our guard:
Of French or Turkish pirats, we never were afraid.
But cal’d stout English sea-men where-ever that we go,
For we make, them to quake, when the stormy winds do blow.

[VERSE 3]
We are your valiant sea-men that brought you out of Spain:
And will as war-like free-men your royal cause maintain.
If you will give commission to wars with France wee’l go:
Then shall we, merry be, when the stormy winds do blow.

[VERSE 4]
’Twas we did sail you over to English ground agen;
And landed you at Dover, with all your noble men.
For which we are renowned where-ever we do go:
Honour will, tend us still, when the stormy winds do blow.

[VERSE 5]
And now we are a ranging upon the ocean seas,
The Frenchmen they are changing and cannot be at ease,
For we will make their top-sailes unto our fleet shall bow:
Then shall we, merry be, when the stormy winds do blow.

[VERSE 6]
Sometimes our tacklings breaking, our masts are cut in two:
Our ships are often leaking, great straits we’re put unto.
In great tempestuous weather, which few at home doth know,
Thus do we, live at sea, when the stormy winds do blow.

[VERSE 7]
When some at home are feeding and cheering up themselves,
Then we at sea are bleeding amongst the rocks and shelves.
Yet greater dangers ready, still we will undergo,
For our King, and will sing, when the stormy winds do blow.

[VERSE 8]
Sometimes when we are sailing our victuals they grow scarse,
Our wives at home bewailing and pittying of our case,
In thinking of the dangers poore seamen undergo.
For our King, still we sing, when the stormy winds do blow.

[VERSE 9]
Yet we are still couragious with any foe to fight:
If Turk or Jew ingage us we put them to the flight,
And make them give us homage before we let them go:
For our King, then we sing, when the stormy winds do blow.

[VERSE 10]
We are the prop of trading, what kind so ere it be:
The originall of lading youre ships with treasury.
None goes beyond a sea-man in riches, gold, and store:
For he brings, wealth to kings, when the stormy winds do blow.

[VERSE 11]
We have some sneezing pouder, the Dutch-man fain would have,
’Twill make him speak the louder, if Kings he will not have.
And cause him to remember the phisick taking so:
When shall we, merry be, when the stormy winds do blow.

[VERSE 12]
Great King wee’l make you famous, youre glory shall out-shine
Romulus and Remus, Godolph or Constantine.
Wee’l bring you gold and treasure by sailing to and fro:
And will fight, day and night, to preserve you from your foe.

--- TITLE: England’S Valour, And Holland’S Terrour [item: PG76941-pg76941-024]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 6326-6403
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Dutchmen beware, we have a fleet,
Will make you tremble when you see’t,
Mann’d with brave Englishmen of high renown,
Who can and will your peacock plumes pull down;
Then cease your boasting, it will nought availe,
You know its but your duty to strike sayle.

[VERSE 2]
Brave loyal hearted English-men, attend whilst I declare,
What noble preparations is made for the Hollands war;
For certain such a bloody fight hath never been before,
As is near, you shall hear, when the cannons loud do roar.

[VERSE 3]
View but our Navy Royal, and you will find it plain,
The like thereof was never seen to sayle upon the maine:
The Duke of York High Admiral will daunt the Dutch-man sure
With his name and his fame, when the cannons loud do roar.

[VERSE 4]
Our ships are bravely rigged, and mann’d with seamen stout,
Our souldiers good will spend their blood to bang their foes about:
They long to be a dealing blows, delay doth vex them sore,
With delight, they will fight, when the cannons loud do roar.
The care and good provision for seamen that is made,
Will make them fight for England’s right and never be afraid:
They’l find far richer plunder then e’re they did before:
Every day, in the fray, when the cannons loud do roar.

[VERSE 5]
Hark how the Dutchmen bluster, they prate and domineer,
They stamp and sweat, they fume and fret, would make one laugh to
    hear:
Their merchant ships are taken for prizes, grives them sore:
But in vain, they complain, when the cannons loud do roar.

[VERSE 6]
Although they be rebellious, yet we shall pull them down,
And teach them how they shall submit to England’s Royal Crown:
Wee’le thump their sides most soundly and beat them ore and ore,
In each fight, for our right, when the cannons loud do roar.

[VERSE 7]
There will be noble knocking, when once the navy’s meet,
Then Holland’s States beware your pates, we shall you roughly greet:
Your treachery at Guiny stands yet upon the score:
You shall pay, at the day when the cannons loud do roar.

[VERSE 8]
Then volontiers come in amain to fight against the foe,
For your reward, you shall have gaine, when to the wars you go;
The Hogan Mogan’s for us all, their riches keep in store:
Then be bold, fight for gold, when the cannons loud do roar.

[VERSE 9]
Brave Allen our Rear Admiral, it was his hap to meet,
Near Cadiz on the Spanish coast, part of the Smyrna fleet:
Where some he took, and others sunk, the rest he battered sore,
Thus they lost, and were crost, when the cannons loud did roar.

[VERSE 10]
Then Butter-boxes mark your hitts, for all your wits are dull,
Wee’le teach you better manners yet, than ever did old Noll:
You then were basted pretty well, and forc’t to cry and lower:
And to weep, on the deep, when the cannons loud did roar.

[VERSE 11]
We have tall ships, that’s newly built, the best that e’re did sayl,
We shall the Flemish vessels pelt, no doubt we shall prevail:
Our oaken-boards will hold it out as well now as before;
Wee’le not flinch, not an inch, when the cannons loud do roar.

[VERSE 12]
Then courage all brave English-men, and never be dismaid,
But fight it out most gallantly, we shall be nobly paid:
When we return with victory, with gold and silver store,
Bells shall ring, whilst we sing, and the cannons loud shall roar.

--- TITLE: The Royal Victory [item: PG76941-pg76941-026]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 6488-6612
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Let England, and Ireland, and Scotland rejoyce,
And render thanksgiving with heart and with voice.
That surly fanatick that now will not sing,
Is false to the kingdom, and foe to the King;
          For he that will grutch,
          Our fortune is such,
  Doth deal for the devil, as well as the Dutch;
For why should my nature or conscience repine,
At taking of his life, that fain would have mine.

[VERSE 2]
So high a victory we could not command,
Had it not been gain’d by an Almighty hand,
The great Lord of Battels did perfect this work,
For God and the King, and the good Duke of York;
          Whose courage was such,
          Against the Low-Dutch,
  That vapour’d and swagger’d, like Lords in a hutch;
But, let the bold Hollander burn, sink, or swim,
They have honour enough to be beaten by him.

[VERSE 3]
Fire, aire, earth, and water, it seems were imploy’d,
To strive for the conquest which we have injoy’d,
No honour, or profit, or safety can spring,
To those that do fight against God and the King;
          The battel was hot,
          And bloudily fought,
  The fire was like rain, and like hail was the shot,
For in this ingagement ten thousand did bleed
Of Flemmings, who now are the Low-Dutch indeed.

[VERSE 4]
In this cruel conflict stout Opdam was slain,
By the great Duke of York, and lies sunk in the main,
’Twas from the Duke’s frigat that he had his doome,
And by the Duke’s valour he was overcome;
          It was his good fate,
          To fall at that rate,
  Who sink under Princes, are buried in state.
Since valour and courage in one grave must lye,
It is a great honour by great hands to dye.

[VERSE 5]
That gallant bold fellow, the son of Van Trump,
Whose brains were beat out by the head of the Rump,
Ingaging with Holmes, a brave captain of ours,
Retreated to Neptune’s salt, waterie bowers:
          His fate was grown grim,
          He no longer could swim,
  But he that caught fishes, now fishes catch him,
They eat up our fish, without reason or lawes,
But now they are going to pay for the sauce.

[VERSE 6]
To mock at men’s miserie is not my aime,
It never can add to an Englishman’s fame,
But I may rejoyce that the battel is wonn,
Because in the victory God’s will is done;
          Whose justice appears
          In such great affairs,
  Who will for Amboina plague them and their heirs:
For he that did cumber his conscience with gilt,
In shedding of blood, his own shall be spilt.

[VERSE 7]
In this cruel contest (our fortune was such),
We tooke seventeen men-of-war from the Dutch,
And likewise (as then the occasion requir’d,
And as God would have it) fourteen more were fir’d.
          At Amboina, when
          They tortur’d our men,
  They look’d not to have the same paid them agen:
With fire and with water their sinews they crack’t,
In fire and in water they dy’d for the fact.
According as our God of battel commanded,
The best of their vessels were fir’d and stranded;
All ships, men-of-war; for what power hath man
To fight with that army, when God leads the van?
          They steere and they stem,
          But ’twas so extream,
  But men were neer dying, with killing of them;
They lost, when the muskets and cannons so thunder’d,
Twice so many thousand, as we have lost hundred.
’Twould make a brave Englishman’s heart leap to see’t,
But forty ships made an escape of their fleet;
Which our men pursue with much courage and strength
’Tis doubtless but we shall surprize them at length;
          If God be our guide,
          And stand by our side,
  We shall be befriended with fair wind and tide;
If Providence prosper us with a good gale,
The Dutch, nor the devil shall ever prevaile.
Prince Rupert like lightning flew through their fleet,
Like flame mix’d with powder, their army did meet,
Ten thousand slain bodies the ocean orespread,
That in few hours distance, were living and dead;
          Their Admirals all,
          Save one, there did fall,
  And death had command like a chief general.
Brave Smith in the Mary did shave out his way
As reapers do wheat, or as mowers do hay.

[VERSE 8]
Stout Lawson and Minn there did play both their parts,
Who emptied their guns in their enemies hearts,
The burly fat Dutchmen being cut out in slips,
The vessels did look more like shambles than ships.
          God prosper the fleete,
          And send they may meet
  De Ruiter to make up the conquest compleat,
God bless all the princes, and every thing
That fights for the kingdom and prayes for the King.

--- TITLE: The English Seaman’S Resolution; Or, The Loyall Subjects Undaunted Valour [item: PG76941-pg76941-027]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 6613-6698
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
I am an undaunted seaman, and for King Charles I will fight:
I’le venture my life and my fortune to defend my countries right:
What enemies ever oppose us my valour with them I will try,
And in the Duke’s sight, I’me resolved to fight with a full
    resolution to dye.

[VERSE 2]
My joyes lies on the maine ocean, and my hammock supports my head,
The bottom shall be my portion, wherein my grave shall be made:
Before the Butter-Box shall my brother abuse, my crimson blood it
    shall flye,
Then tack about fleet, let Trump and us meet, for I came to the
    seas to dye.
Now Jocky begins to be civil, and aloud for a King he doth cry:
The Dutch are as false as the devil, still working of tretchery:
With the sound of our drums, and smoak of our guns, we mean for to
    darken the skie,
For the Duke and his fleet, once more will you meet, with a full
    resolution to dye.

[VERSE 3]
Slip not your necks out of your collars, but come on with a chearful
    heart:
We mean to have some of your dollars before that our fleets do part:
Then drink up your brandy-wine cheerely, to Trump and his company,
For the Duke and his fleet, once more will you meet, with a full
    resolution to dye.

[VERSE 4]
Brave General Monck will defeat you, and teach you good manners to
    know,
You know that before he did beat you, and made you to cringe full
    low:
He’l make you all know to your sorrow, ’twere better Peccavi to cry,
Then for to stand out, the tother odd bout, and in the seas perish
    and dye.

[VERSE 5]
Stout Smith that noble Commander, of his valour again you must
    taste:
He’le shew you the English banner and send you away at a blast,
As Opdam was served before you, when into the aire he did flie:
Then you will repent, that e’re you were bent upon the main ocean
    to dye.

[VERSE 6]
Brave Holmes and Mimms they have vowed, for Charles our King they
    will stand,
The rebells they shall be subdued and quell’d in the turn of a hand:
For whilst that our ships can sail, boyes, we scorn a ship’s length
    for to flie:
Pay your money with speed, for that we do need, or else come to the
    seas to dye.

[VERSE 7]
The seas were never so graced, with so many brave gallants before,
Your men of war shall be chased and beaten home to your own door:
We’l block you up in your own harbours, and our cannon bullets shall
    flye,
For the Duke and his fleet, once more will you meet with a full
    resolution to dye.

[VERSE 8]
What, must we still wait on your leasure, or is not your money yet
    coyn’d?
We mean to have some of your treasure for no children of us you
    shall find:
We scorn for to wait on such puppies, we have other fish for to fry:
Then hang up your States, your masters and mates, that sent you to
    seas for to dye.

[VERSE 9]
Then leave of your jeering and mocking, and murmure at home and
    repine,
’Tis better then for to be knocking upon the salt ocean brine:
Then cast up your caps and be merry, brave English boyes let them
    flye,
And pray for King Charles and his navy, and let the proud
    Hollanders dye.

--- TITLE: England’S Tryumph, And Hollands Downfall; Or, The Second Royal Victory [item: PG76941-pg76941-028]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 6699-6830
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
String up your hearts, and tune your throats,
With merry and triumphant notes;
Send sorrow from your souls away,
You never had more cause for joy:
The creeple may cast away his crutch,
And dance the downfal of the Dutch.
Great Brittain now may take it’s ease,
King Charles is Soveraign of the seas.

[VERSE 2]
The first and second day of June,
Put Holland’s trumpets out of tune;
Prince Rupert and the Duke to boot,
Have given the Dutch-men all the rout:
So bloudily they cut their coats,
And bruis’d and bang’d and burn’d their boats,
They ne’re will offer to displease,
King Charles their Soveraign of the seas.

[VERSE 3]
If number would have won the day,
We were less numerous than they;
When sixteen Zealand ships came in,
If odds would doo’t, they needs must win:
For they were ninety-six compleate,
But who can save, whom Heaven will beat.
When God his mercy will express,
Unto the Soveraign of the seas.

[VERSE 4]
The Duke with loyalty inrag’d,
With fifty, ninety-six ingag’d;
But thirty of the Dutch (to meet
Prince Rupert) then did quit their fleet,
Thinking to seize the Prince by slight,
Before their forces could unite:
But no such shallow plots as these,
Can cheat the Soveraign of the seas.

[VERSE 5]
The Prince and Duke did nobly fayn,
Their loyal forces both combine;
And on the foaming billows curl’d,
They bid defiance to the world:
The Dutch ingage with all their powers,
And scatter on us shot like showers;
But ’tis not such poor powers, as these,
Can quell the Soveraign of the seas.

[VERSE 6]
Almost as swiftly as desir’d,
Fourteen of theirs were took and fir’d;
But their Vice-Admiral did meet,
Our Duke i’ th’ front of all his fleet:
They were so near they might have clutcht,
Almost shook hands, their yard-arms touch’d;
But George’s broad-side did displease,
The foe to th’ Soveraign of the seas.

[VERSE 7]
The fight was then so fierce and hot,
His hand was bruis’d, his breeches shot;
Yet though they came so hotly on,
As soon they vanish’d and were gon;
Forty or fifty men of ours,
Were kill’d and knock’d down by their powers,
Yet some of these (though with much pain)
Appear’d upon the decks again.

[VERSE 8]
Prince Rupert like the god of war,
Through their fleet shot like a star;
Whose influence like lightning shone,
And pierc’d the marrow through the bone:
The seas with bloud were much imbru’d,
The Dutch-men fled, our men pursu’d,
Till none were seen that could displease,
King Charles the Soveraign of the seas.

[VERSE 9]
So long as we had powder, we
Pursu’d the Dutchmen through the sea;
And their du Ruiter, he in whom,
They builded all their hopes to come:
Four of their greatest ships were sunck,
They cry, ‘The devil’s in the Monck,’
Never such men appear’d like these,
To guard the Soveraign of the seas.

[VERSE 10]
A gallant ship of theirs was fyr’d,
With seventy six guns double tyr’d;
Our Henery, a ship of fame,
From three fire-ships escap’d the flame:
And was so strong beset, that then
She lost at least one hundred men.
We must indure such hurts as these,
To guard the Soveraign of the seas.

[VERSE 11]
By sea, so black and red a fight,
No time or age e’er brought to light;
The fire and water did contend,
Which should first bring them to their end:
More valiant men kill’d in three dayes,
Then three and twenty years can raise.
We can’t afford such brunts as these,
To guard the Soveraign of the seas.

[VERSE 12]
On Whitsunday the Duke did send
His men for cure, and ships to mend
Unto our English coast, where care
Is taken for their swift repair:
These cards thus dealt, out of the lump,
The Royal Katherine turn’d up trump.
A sacrifice which doth appease
The Royal Soveraign of the seas.

[VERSE 13]
To summe up all, ’tis thought they are
Unfit to raise another war;
’Tis much presum’d, ’cause they did fail,
When they had made out all their sayl:
These are some of those warlike tricks,
Becket presag’d in sixty six.
Yet alwayes such events as these
Secure the Soveraign of the seas.

--- TITLE: Englands Royall Conquest [item: PG76941-pg76941-029]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 6831-6954
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Rejoyce, rejoyce, brave English boys,
For now is the time to speak our joys;
The routed Dutch are run away,
And we have clearly won the day;
We now are masters of the seas,
And may with safety live at ease.
    Then Butter-boxes all lament,
    For now you are paid to your own content.

[VERSE 2]
You thought to rule as Lords and Kings,
But now we’ve taught you better things,
Methinks you might have known before,
What ’twas, to come so near our shore.
You often times have tri’d our force,
And still you alwaies had the worse;
    Then Butter-boxes all lament,
    For now you are paid to your own content.

[VERSE 3]
The Dutch are grown so wise and sage,
Without great ods they’l not ingage;
Brave Englishmen will never grutch,
With twenty sail, to fight forty Dutch,
And bring their Lordships by the lee,
And pay them home for the treachery.
    Then Butter-boxes all lament,
    For now you are paid to your own content.
Whilst that our ships were fitting forth,
They counted us men of little worth;
Upon our coast they made great shows,
Not thinking to be paid with blows,
But when our fleet did once appear,
O then their hearts were fill’d with fear.
    Then Butter-boxes all lament,
    For now you are paid to your own content.

[VERSE 4]
July the five and twentieth day,
Began this sharp and bloody fray.
At noon the fleets were both ingag’d,
And men on each side were inrag’d,
The bullets they did flie amain,
And some were wounded, others slain.
    Then Butter-boxes all lament,
    For now you are paid to your own content.

[VERSE 5]
Prince Rupert and brave General Monk,
So pelted Ruyter and Vantrump,
That they were in a chafing sweat,
And thought it safest to retreat,
By little and little they shrunk away,
Their want of courage did them betray.
    Then Butter-boxes all lament,
    For now you are paid to your own content.

[VERSE 6]
Five hours they fought couragiously,
Before the Dutch began to flie,
But then their fleet was severed quite,
Whilest we maintain’d a chasing fight,
For two dayes space we did pursue,
And pelted them till their sides look’d blew.
    Then Butter-boxes all lament,
    For now you are paid to your own content.

[VERSE 7]
Sir Jeremy Smith did roughly greet,
The Admiral of the Zealand fleet,
With fire and ball he made them run,
Untill the victory he had won,
Most bravely he maintain’d the fight,
Till they divided were by night.
    Then Butter-boxes all lament,
    For now you are paid to your own content.

[VERSE 8]
Brave Allen and Holmes fought like men,
And chas’d the Dutch with five to ten,
So sharply did they ply the fight
Till all the Dutch were Arouted quite,
The Flemmings they found such boisterous play,
That they in plain terms ran away.
    Then Butter-boxes all lament,
    For now you are paid to your own content.

[VERSE 9]
Eight ships of theirs we sunk and fired,
Which for to save they much desired,
And kill’d great numbers of their men,
Where we lost one still they lost ten,
We lost a stately ship and tall
The Resolution we did call.
    Then Butter-boxes all lament,
    For now you are paid to your own content.
Our Generals (blest be God) are well,
And all our fleet as we hear tell,
Lies daring on the Holland coast,
The Dutch have now no cause to boast,
’Tis said de Ruyter and Trump are slain,
And never will face their foes again.
    Then Butter-boxes all lament,
    For now you are paid to your own content.

[VERSE 10]
The cannons from the Tower did roar,
When this good news did come to shore,
The bells did ring and bone-fires shine,
And healths carrous’d in beer and wine.
God bless King Charles and all our fleet,
And grant true friends may safely meet.
    Then Butter-boxes brag no more,
    For now we have beaten you or’e and or’e.

--- TITLE: Holland Turn’D To Tinder; Or, England’S Third Great Royal Victory [item: PG76941-pg76941-030]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 6955-7087
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
The weather is clear, which was late overcast
And our long expectations are answer’d at last,
With news from the navie, which I shal impart
Enough to rejoyce every English-mans heart,
      That’s honest and true,
      (And is not a Jew)
  But would give to God and to Caesar his due.
This will be a joyfull and royal relation
To such as love God, the King and the nation:
Those Dutch demigorgons, God’s power convinces
And makes them all servants that aim’d to be princes.

[VERSE 2]
On Wednesday last the twenty fift day of July,
Came in this narration which Ile tell ye truly,
FroAm brave Cap. Talbot a man of stout carriage
That then brought a part of this news into Harwich,
      Both ruine and rage,
      (In brave equipage)
  Last Wednesday at noone both fleets did ingage
The winds were our freinds, and did fill out our sails
With very fresh northerly brave top-sail gales;
We din’d with the Hogens upon their own coast,
You might a had Dutch-men there boild or roast.

[VERSE 3]
At first both the navies did fight in a line,
Three hours with much fury and force, but in fine,
The enemies fleet into three squadrons flew,
And Sir Jeremie Smith (Admiral of the Blew)
      By lot was to face,
      Persue, and to chase
  Out the Zelanders squadron, the strongest that was.
They fought it out furiously, all the day after,
And fiercely encounter’d, like wild-fire and water,
A frigat of ours called the Resolution,
Was burnt by the Dutch in this depth of confusion.

[VERSE 4]
The White and Red squadrons did ply that two other
So fast that they almost were choak’d with the smother
They tugg’d very hard who should stand it out longest
Our Blew was the weakest, the Zealand the strongest,
      And yet they fight
      ’Till so late at night,
  That powder and darkness depriv’d them of sight.
The two Holland squadrons both turn’d tail and fled
Pursued by the squadrons of our White and Red,
Upon Thursday morning betwixt nine and ten,
The Zealand’s were cripled and hopp’d home agen.

[VERSE 5]
To aid the Blew squadron a thousand stout men
Were sent (in the frigats) by Sir William Pen,
And Talbot doth tell us ere he did retire,
On Wednesday night he saw six Dutch ships on fire;
      Two hundred almost
      Of our men were lost,
  Such victories seldom are gain’d without cost;
The Zealanders Admiral some think is gone
Unto his last home, when his flag was shot down,
’Tis highly presum’d by the best knowing men,
They nere will be able to fight us agen.

[VERSE 6]
The prestmen wel mingl’d with stout voluntiers
Did drink away dolor and fight away fears:
Our small shot did stand to’t with valiant desire,
Their guns spit and sparkl’d like bay-leaves in fire;
      Our cannons did roare
      They sunk and they tore,
  Thousands that heard them will nere hear them more.
It is better far in a good cause to dye,
Then with a bad conscience to live great and high:
And in acts of honour there’s no better thing,
Then dye a true martyr for God and the King.

[VERSE 7]
Our White and Red squadrons Du Ruiter engag’d
Five hours, till at last his fierce fury aswaged,
He fought as if he had been Mars his own son,
From ten in the morning, till three afternoon.
      Our Red and our White
      Did dazel his sight,
  They made him to turn and to run away quite,
For no other reason as some men suppose
But courage did fall from his heart to his hose:
Though bad men seek victory, and think to win it,
It never will prosper, if God be not in it.

[VERSE 8]
Our frigots persued him, our canons did roare,
Until they were come within two miles of shore:
Our great ships persu’d, and continu’d the slaughter,
So far till they were within six fathom water:
      They durst not look back,
      To see what we lack,
  But posting for life, to their harbors they tack;
Their flags being struck, and not set up again,
’Tis thought that Van Trump and Du Ruiter is slain.
He that doth protect us, will save us from evil,
In spight of the Dutch, the Dane, or the Devil.

[VERSE 9]
Besides all the damage our shipping hath done
To vessels and men, in their fight, and their run,
Two very stout ships we have taken and fir’d,
And in them five hundred and ninety men tyr’d,
      With tugging for that,
      They cannot get at
  To make England stoop to their pittyful state;
When slaves are turn’d princes, no tyrant so evil,
When beggers are mounted, they ride to the Devil,
No souls so insulting as such sordid slaves,
As climb to preferment on honest mens graves.
Our gen’rals and navy, are all safe and sound,
The Prince and the Duke have our foes in the pound;
They in their own harbors are pris’ners at ease,
The King of Great Brittain commands where he please.
      We ride on the ocean,
      And waite for the motion,
  To venter again they have no great devotion.
Had they not crept in, they’d been burnt to a cinder
And Holland by this time, had been turn’d to tinder.
God bless King and Queen, with the Duke and all such,
As are friends to Great Brittain, and foes to the Dutch.

--- TITLE: The Second Part Of The Late And Terrible Fight On St. James’S Day, One Thousand 666 [item: PG76941-pg76941-032]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 7226-7363
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
A Second Part I here indite
Of the English and Dutch bloody fight,
  With a thump, thump, thump, thump, thump,
  Thump, thump upon thump.
This only tells what was done since
The renowned Duke and famous Prince
Made the Seven-headed Beast to wince,
  With a thump, etc.

[VERSE 2]
As you the first so sing this too
To the French tune call’d Monsieur Ragou
  With a thump, etc.
Or else because that this discourses
Of Beaufort’s and De Ruyter’s forces,
Call the tune the Dancing Hobby Horses,
  With a thump, etc.

[VERSE 3]
Sing not High English in Low Dutch,
Though now our foes are truly such,
  With a thump, etc.
This must be sung, not said at all,
And they that sing must rise and fall;
In this ballad too the tune is all,
  With a thump, etc.

[VERSE 4]
The terrible fight on St. James’s Day
Ended with Ruyter’s running away,
  With a thump, etc.
The first part did th’ officers prayse,
The Duke of York and King now saies
The sea-men too deserve some bays,
  With a thump, etc.

[VERSE 5]
For though the officers bear the bell
The private sea-men rang the Dutch knel,
  With a thump, etc.
The Bores fought well, with brandy drunk;
But in two houres their courage sunk,
And then like beaten stock-fish stunk,
  With a thump, etc.

[VERSE 6]
Goliath-like look’d Houndsfoot and Skellum,
But Monk and’s fryers with sling and stones fell ’um,
  With a thump, etc.
Ruyter swears that Trump came not to ’s aid;
Trump swears Ruyter ran like coward, afraid.
We had done both their works had they staid,
  With a thump, etc.

[VERSE 7]
While Trump and Ruyter sneake in th’ Welling
The brave English land at Uly and Schelling
  With a thump, etc.
A thousand homes with eight score ships
We fired like so many chips,
And made the States to bite their lips,
  With a thump, etc.
This was a most prodigious rap,
To loose five millions at a clap,
  With a thump, etc.
We beg but one boon more, kinde Fates,
Their India fleet, and then, proud States,
Wee’l make you shit as small as rats,
  With a thump, etc.

[VERSE 8]
Old Rome neere did ought worth a doyt,
Compar’d with Holmes’s brave exploit,
  With a thump, etc.
The tale of ten years’ war for Hellen
Homer had never thought worth telling
Had he but heard of Uly and Schelling,
  With a thump, etc.

[VERSE 9]
Twelve East-land ships did likewise fall in-
To the hands of stout Sir Thomas Allen,
  With a thump, etc.
And now, in spite of Adelar
And Beaufort too, we’ve pitch and tarr
And ropes enough to end the warr
  With a thump, etc.

[VERSE 10]
Our victory hath but one flaw,
The unhappy loss of the Breda,
  Without any thump, etc.
On the Dutch coast she ran aground,
And without men was strangely found:
They merit hanging if not drown’d,
  With a thump, etc.

[VERSE 11]
This vessel’s luck was never good;
In her five captains lost their blood,
  With a thump, etc.
At her mishap we must not grutch;
’Twas Heaven’s will it should be such,
Because that the ship’s name was Dutch.
  With a thump, etc.

[VERSE 12]
Alas! alas! poor baffl’d Hans,
The Dane can’t ayd thee, nor dares France.
  Thou, thou hast had thump upon thump,
  Thump, thump upon thump.
The Monsieur’s fleet a mangy crew is.
Monk’s brave boys eat beef and brewis,
Cry, ‘A f---- for Denmark and King Lewis!’
  With a thump, etc.

[VERSE 13]
Bow then to Charles, distressed States,
After so many broken pates,
  With a thump, thump still upon thump, etc.
Beg peace, or next your banks shall rue,
And we will give the Divel his due;
He shall take Monsieur, the sea drown you;
  Then are ye both thumpt, and mumpt, and mumpt, etc.

[VERSE 14]
Now, to conclude, I will take care,
As ballads use to end with prayer,
  With a thump, etc.;
For ballads made of the old fashion
Should still conclude with supplication
For King and Queen, and the whole nation,
  With a thump, etc.

[VERSE 15]
God bless the Swede, he’s not our foe,
And Spain’s King too, though France say no;
  They both wish the Dutch well thumpt, thumpt, etc.
Heaven send our fleet auspicious gales,
Our King and Queen a Prince of Wales,
And then let who will bite their nayles
  When we all our foes have thumpt and mumpt, etc.

--- TITLE: The Dutch Damnified; Or, The Butter-Boxes Bob’D [item: PG76941-pg76941-033]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 7364-7487
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Ring bells for joy, let none be sad,
For now we have news will make you glad,
Will make you blith and merry too
To see how the Dutch are forc’d to bow:
Their brags and boasts will not prevail,
We’ll teach them for to lowre their sail.
Then, Hogan Mogans, b’ware your pates,
For now we shall make you distressed States.

[VERSE 2]
We paid you home in July last,
And soundly did your sides bumbast;
If that you had not swiftly run
You surely had been quite undone:
But now we are landed on your shore,
And found the way to make you poor.
Then, Hogan Mogans, b’ware your pates,
For now we shall make you distressed States.

[VERSE 3]
For all your idle vain excuses
E’re long we shall pull up your sluces;
Our men have found a way to land,
As you by this will understand:
It will be but a bitter pill
When such sad news your hearts do fill.
Then, Hogan Mogans, b’ware your pates,
For now we shall make you distressed States.

[VERSE 4]
You in your harbours lurk for fear,
Not thinking such bad news to hear;
We scorn to come and steal your sheep,
And then like thieves away to creep:
Your towns to burn, and ships to fire,
Is work that Englishmen desire.
Then, Hogan Mogans, b’ware your pates,
For now we shall make you distressed States.

[VERSE 5]
Sir Robert Holmes, that valiant knight
Had orders upon Tuesday night
The Uly Island for to burn
And quite destroy’t ere he return:
Sir Philip Howard did him assist,
Sir William Jennings he did his best.
Then, Hogan Mogans, curse your fates,
For now we shall make you distressed States.

[VERSE 6]
They chose eleven hundred men
To pull the Dutch out of their den;
With fire-ships, ketches, boats, and hoyes,
Well mann’d with lusty English boyes:
With joyful hearts they leave the fleet,
And sayle away their foes to meet.
Then, Hogan Mogans, curse your fates,
For now we shall make you distressed States.

[VERSE 7]
At length they spy’d without all faile
One hundred and seventy saile
Of merchant ships which anchored were
In Uly road, being void of fear.
Sir Robert Holmes he thought it meet
With fire-ships to destroy that fleet.
Then, Hogan Mogans, ’ware your pates,
For now we shall make you distressed States.
So hotly they pursued the game
That straight the fleet was on a flame:
Some frigats which the rest did guard,
Just like their neighbours, so they far’d;
Our men most furiously were bent,
And burnt them down incontinent.
Then, Hogan Mogans, ’ware your pates,
For now we shall make you distressed States.

[VERSE 8]
This being done away we haste,
The Schelling Island for to waste,
And there we fright our cowardly foes,
And land our men where none oppose.
Then up we martch into the isle,
Our crafty foes for to beguile.
Then, Hogan and Mogans, ’ware your pates,
For now we shall make you distressed States.

[VERSE 9]
When they heard of our coming nigh,
Away they fled, all that could flye,
And left their goods and all the rest,
To be dispos’d as we thought best.
The bravest town in all that place
We burnt quite down and did deface.
Now, Hogan Mogans, beware your pates,
For now we shall make you distressed States.

[VERSE 10]
Our men had plunder there good store,
To make them rich, they’l ne’er be poor;
They brought away great store of plate,
And now they quaff their cups in state;
Their cabbins are like gold-smith shops,
God send us many such like crops.
Now, Hogan Mogans, curse your fates,
For now we shall make you distressed States.

[VERSE 11]
Their trugtail’d frows were in a maze
To see their town all on a blaze;
They wept and waild and wrung their jaws,
And cursed their States, which was the cause.
May all that’s enemies to our King
Be brought to such like banquetting.
Now, Hogan Mogans, curse your fates,
For now we shall make you distressed States.

--- TITLE: A Song On The Duke’S Late Glorious Success Over The Dutch [item: PG76941-pg76941-034]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 7488-7540
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
One day, as I was sitting still
  Upon the side of Dunwich Hill,
And looking on the ocean,
  By chance I saw De Ruyter’s fleet
  With Royal James’s squadron meet;
  In sooth it was a noble treat
To see that brave commotion.

[VERSE 2]
  I cannot stay to name the names
  Of all the ships that fought with James,
Their number, or their tonnage;
  But this I say: the noble host
  Right gallantly did take its post,
  And covered all the hollow coast
From Walderswyck to Dunwich.

[VERSE 3]
  The French, who should have join’d the Duke,
  Full far astern did lag and look,
Although their hulls were lighter:
  But nobly faced the Duke of York,
  Tho’ some may wink and some may talk,
  Right stoutly did his vessel stalk
To buffet with De Ruyter.

[VERSE 4]
  Well might you hear their guns, I guess,
  From Sizewell Gap to Easton Ness,
The show was rare and sightly:
  They batter’d without let or stay,
  Until the evening of that day,--
  ’Twas then the Dutchmen run away,
The Duke had beat them tightly.
  Of all the battles gain’d at sea
  This was the rarest victory
Since Philip’s Grand Armado.
  I will not name the rebel Blake;
  He fought for whoreson Cromwell’s sake,
  And yet was forced three days to take
To quell the Dutch bravado.

[VERSE 5]
  So now we’ve seen them take to flight
  This way and that, where’er they might,
To windward or to leeward;
  Here’s to King Charles, and here’s to James,
  And here’s to all the captains’ names,
  And here’s to all the Suffolk dames,
And here’s to the House of Stuart.

--- TITLE: Captain Mansfield’S Fight With The Turkes At Sea [item: PG76941-pg76941-036]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 7659-7708
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Our goodly ship was loaded deep, with anchors three beneath her bow;
’Twas east-north-east we steer’d our course, and as near the wind as
    we could stow.
We had not sailed glasses three, nor yet ten leagues from our
    loading port,
Before we spyed ten Turkish men-of-war, and after us they did resort.

[VERSE 2]
‘O hail! O hail! you English dogs, O hail! and strike your sails
    quickly,
For you shall go with us this night, and ever after into slavery.’
O then bespoke our captain bold, and a well bespoken man was he,
‘If you must have my topsails down, come on board and strike them
    for me.

[VERSE 3]
‘To the top, to the top, my merry boatswain, to the
    main-top-mast-head so high,
And sling me here that main-top-mast-yard, and see your business
    you supply.
To the top, to the top, my boatswain’s mate, to the
    fore-top-mast-head with speed
And sling me here that fore-top-sail-yard, for we never had more
    need.
‘To the top, to the top, my little cabin-boy, to the
    mizen-top-mast-head so high,
And spread abroad St. George’s flag, for under that we live or die.’
O then bespoke our gunner bold, and a well bespoken man was he,
‘Swab your guns, brave boys, while they’re hot, for powder and ball
    you shall have free.’

[VERSE 4]
‘Keep aluff, keep aluff;’ says the master’s mate, ‘keep aluff,
    whilst that you may.
We’l fight it out like English boys; it ne’er shall be said we run
    away.’
So to it we went like lions bold, as enemies do when they meet;
We fought from twelve to sun-rising, and spared but one sail of
    their fleet.

[VERSE 5]
O three we burnt, and three we sunk, and the other three run away;
And one we brought to old England, to shew them we had won the day.
All you that know our gallant ship, and want to know our captain’s
    name,
It is Captain Mansfield of Bristol Town, and the Marygold, a ship
    of fame.

--- TITLE: The Algiers Slave’S Releasement; Or, The Unchangeable Boat-Swain [item: PG76941-pg76941-037]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 7709-7774
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
No pain like the Jayl of Love, nor no such torments found
To those that loyal mean to prove, whose loves are firm and sound.
This loyal person ne’r would change; like a true lover he
Indur’d his fetters and his chains, and Betty’s captive be.

[VERSE 2]
Of a constant young seaman a story I’le tell,
That I hope all true lovers will please very well;
All his cry was still, ‘Though I continue a slave,
Yet the want of my dear is far worse than a grave.

[VERSE 3]
‘All the tedious long night in close prison I lye,
But methinks I behold my dear love lying by;
In the midst of my pains this doth still give me ease:
That is pleasant to me, which some call a disease.

[VERSE 4]
‘Sometimes to the gallies I’m forced to go,
Though amongst all my fellows like a slave I do row;
And when I am spent with this labour and pain
The thoughts of my love doth revive me again.

[VERSE 5]
‘And when with strappadoes sometimes I do meet,
I find little pain, if I think on my sweet;
Thus ’twixt pleasure and pain my time I do spend,
Yet vow to be constant unto my life’s end.

[VERSE 6]
‘No torture nor pain shall make me forsake
Nor flye from my reason for my Betty’s sake;
I do slight all the torments bestow’d by the Turk
When I think on my dear, and in gallies do work.

[VERSE 7]
‘But tho’ a renegado to make me they strive,
I’le never consent to ‘t whilst I am alive,
But will a couragious true Protestant be:
I’le be true to my faith and be constant to thee.

[VERSE 8]
‘Ah, Betty, when billows do rage and do roar
For want of thy sight I am troubled sore:
Whilst other are troubled with terror and fear,
Yet I am cheer’d up with the thought of my dear.

[VERSE 9]
‘No prison is like to the want of thy sight,
Which locks up my bliss, for thou art my delight:
Though distant I am, therefore only opprest,
Yet still my dear Betty doth lodge in my breast.

[VERSE 10]
‘In the midst of my sorrows, whilst others do mourn,
’Tis the want of my love that doth make me forlorn;
Yet I would not enjoy thee in this cursed place,
Though for want of thy love my tears trickle apace.
‘But be of good cheer, for every one knows
’Tis an ill wind indeed that no comfort blows;
And again I do hope thee in England to see,
Then who’l be so happy as Betty and me?

[VERSE 11]
‘And now, thorough Providence, I am return’d:
By shipwrack I ’scap’d, for our ship it was burn’d;
No torment like mine was when I was a slave,
For the want of my Betty was worse than a grave.’

--- TITLE: The Benjamin’S Lamentation For Their Sad Loss At Sea By Storms And Tempests [item: PG76941-pg76941-038]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 7775-7891
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Captain Chilver’s gone to sea,
      I, boys, O boys!
With all his company, I!
Captain Chilver’s gone to sea,
With all his company,
  In the brave Benjamin, O!

[VERSE 2]
Thirty guns this ship did bear,
      I, boys, O boys!
They were bound for Venice fair, I!
Thirty guns this ship did bear,
And a hundred men so clear,
  In the brave Benjamin, O!

[VERSE 3]
But by ill storms at sea,
      I, boys, O boys!
Which bred our misery, I!
But by ill storms at sea
Were drove out o’ th’ way
  In the brave Benjamin, O!

[VERSE 4]
We had more wind than we could bear,
      I, boys, O boys!
Our ship it would not steer, I!
We had more wind than we could bear,
Our masts and sails did tear
  In the brave Benjamin, O!

[VERSE 5]
The first harm that we had,
      I, boys, O boys!
It makes my heart so sad, I!
The first harm that we had
We lost our fore-mast head:
  O the poor Benjamin, O!

[VERSE 6]
The seas aloud did roar,
      I, boys, O boys!
We being far from shore, I!
The sea no favour shows
Unto friends nor foes,
  O the poor Benjamin, O!

[VERSE 7]
The next harm that we spy’d,
      I, boys, O boys!
Then we to Heaven cry’d, I!
Down fell our main-mast head,
Which struck our senses dead
  In the poor Benjamin, O!

[VERSE 8]
Then we with seas were crost,
      I, boys, O boys!
And on the ocean tost, I!
Thus we with seas was tost,
Many a brave man was lost
  In the brave Benjamin, O!

[VERSE 9]
The next harm that we had,
      I, boys, O boys!
We had cause to be sad, I!
The next harm that we had
We lost four men from the yard
  In the poor Benjamin, O!

[VERSE 10]
Disabled as I name,
      I, boys, O boys!
We were drove on the main, I!
So the next harm we had
We lost our rudder’s head
  In the poor Benjamin, O!

[VERSE 11]
Then we fell all to prayer,
      I, boys, O boys!
The Lord our lives would spare, I!
Then we fell all to prayer,
And He at last did hear
  Us in the Benjamin, O!

[VERSE 12]
Although we sail’d in fear,
      I, boys, O boys!
The Lord our ship did steer, I!
Our prayers so fervent were
That we had passage clear
  Into brave Plimouth Sound, O!

[VERSE 13]
We came in Plimouth Sound,
      I, boys, O boys!
Our hearts did then resound, I!
When we came to Plymouth Sound
Our grief with joy was crown’d
  In the poor Benjamin, O!

[VERSE 14]
When we came all on shore,
      I, boys, O boys!
Every man at his dore, I!
When we came all on shore
Our grief we did deplore
  In the poor Benjamin, O!

[VERSE 15]
You gallant young men all,
      I, boys, O boys!
’Tis unto you I call, I!
Likewise brave seamen all,
Lament the loss and fall
  Of the poor Benjamin, O!

--- TITLE: The Treachery Of The Spaniards Of Porto Rico To The Dartmouth Frigot And Her Company [item: PG76941-pg76941-039]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 7892-8034
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
When the Dartmouth friggot lay off the town
That’s call’d Porto Rico, of some renown,
The captain sent thither to know if he cou’d
Come peaceably in for water and wood.
  They answered we were welcome there,
  And might venture in without all fear
  And said it should be their only care
  Whatever we wanted to prepare.

[VERSE 2]
On the governor’s promised honour then
We took up the pilot, who carry’d us in.
We rid undisturbed and safe all the night,
Nor smoak’d any cheat till the morning’s light
  Discovered their base and damned intent;
  For when to the wat’ring place we went
  We were seiz’d and into prison sent;
  And then we found out what ’twas they meant.

[VERSE 3]
Quoth the governor, ‘Now you shall ne’re be free
Till I your commissions and orders do see;
For your ship is become a forfeiture,
And I’le sink her if she but dares to stirr:
  For here my guns can command you all.
  If she goes not where I say shee shall
  I’le batter her sides with my iron ball
  From every fort and the city wall.’

[VERSE 4]
The council was call’d, and demurely they sate,
To manage the business by grave debate:
The bald-pated rascals (as if they were full
Of politick tricks) did squint and look dull,
  Yet knew not what to doe in the case;
  They could hardly look us in the face,
  Their action was so openly base,
  And guilt made ’em conscious of their digrace,
Till the Don cry’d out to the grey-bearded knaves,
‘We’ve now got a parcel of brawny slaves,
With provision enough to furnish the town;
For (unless we are fools) the ship is our own:
  And since they are in, we’ll make ’em sure,
  Our harbour’s mouth is the prison door.
  Take my advice, and I will secure
  They never shall goe to sea any more.

[VERSE 5]
‘And because that the ship is under command,
Nor can they the force of our walls withstand,
Wee’ll suffer these silly poltroons to go free,
For their friggot thereby gets no libertie:
  But I’le order them to goe where I
  Will maul ’em with more conveniency,
  Or where upon the shoals they may ly,
  And then they may bid their ship good-by.’

[VERSE 6]
The business they had consulted so well,
They sent us away, and sent one to tell
That if our commander refus’d to obey,
And didn’t immediately order to weigh,
  And further within the harbour sail,
  For certain then that he would not fail
  To send some bullets to ferk our tail,
  And those would be words that should prevail.

[VERSE 7]
‘In vain,’ said the captain, ‘you threaten us, sirs,
For I value your guns but as barking of currs;
Begin when you please, you shall find us to be
As brave English hearts as e’re saw the sea.
  To-morrow I will certainly weigh,
  And brave all your guns in open day;
  Maugre whatever you do or say,
  Your governour’s orders I’le not obey.’

[VERSE 8]
Next day, to decoy us, he cunningly sent
A fawning excuse and a complement,
And said he would try to dispatch us that day
And send us in peace and in safety away;
  But he had no design in the thing
  But writing letters unto our King,
  Which a messenger, he said, should bring
  Before the sun was near setting.

[VERSE 9]
Our top-sails were loose, and the sheats were haul’d home,
We waited all day, but no messenger come.
We saw on the shoar the friars so gay,
And some were in black, but most were in grey;
  To ev’ry fort and castle they went;
  But the Lord in heav’n knowes what they meant,
  Unless (that it might be their intent)
  To bless e’ry man, gun, and battlement.

[VERSE 10]
No sooner the fryars were gone to their home
But we heard an alarm beat by the drum,
And then a command was sent us agen
To furl our top-sails and warp further in;
  And if we didn’t immediately
  With what the governour said comply,
  From all his forts he’d let the guns fly,
  And batter us most confoundedly.

[VERSE 11]
Then straight from the city we plainly could see,
The souldiers were marching most hastily,
And headed they were by their fat general,
To every fort and each castle wall:
  But we were quite careless all the while,
  And at their grand folly did only smile,
  Resolving the Spaniards to beguile
  And leave ’em without their wish’t-for spoil.

[VERSE 12]
By this time the busie old sun was gone down,
And candles were lighting about the town;
The commander then cheared his men so brave,
And the word for cutting the cable gave,
  Which was done ith’ twinkling of an eye,
  And the sails were set as suddenly,
  Which as soon as e’re they could espy
  A volley of small shott did let fly.
The warning when every castle had got,
They fired on us (like mad) theire great shott;
With louder huzzas we answer’d agen,
And shew’d ’em that we were true Englishmen;
  Thus under sail alongst ’em we past,
  And till convenient we kept all fast;
  But halloo’d out, nor were agast,
  And sent a broadside amongst ’em at last.

[VERSE 13]
Thus fireing, and fireing, we held a good space,
And gave ’em the go by to their disgrace;
Three hours or more continu’d the fight,
With fire and smoke, and a very calm night,
  And tho’ within pistol shott we were,
  Yet nevertheless we got well clear,
  Without much hurt or any fear,
  And to tell you the tale are now come here.

--- TITLE: The Golden Voyage; Or, The Prosperous Arrival Of The James And Mary [item: PG76941-pg76941-040]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 8035-8115
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Listen awhile, and I here will unfold what seemeth to promise
    promotion:
There is great plenty of silver and gold now newly took out of the
    ocean:
Forty-three years this treasure has lain since the galion was
    stav’d asunder
Among the scholes and the rocks in the main, yet this may be now
    the world’s wonder.
It being seventeen leagues from the shore, ’tis wonderful if you do
    mind it,
Many has search’d for this treasure before, but none had the fortune
    to find it
Till the brave James and Mary of fame, whom Fortune hath highly
    befriended,
She most successfully sail’d on the main, and was from all dangers
    defended.

[VERSE 2]
She was inform’d where this treasure did lye by some that had gi’en
    information;
Therefore some nobles did freely comply, without any more
    disputation,
To fit her forth; this favour they show, it being their free will
    and pleasure.
With a fair gale to the ocean they go, where they find great plenty
    of treasure.

[VERSE 3]
’Twas in the midst of September they went forth in the brave James
    and Mary,
All the ship’s crew with a loyal consent, they being both cheerful
    and airy;
And in short time they there did arrive where they was with rocks
    so surrounded
That they did hardly know how to contrive to keep themselves from
    being drownded.

[VERSE 4]
There they was forced some time for to lose, and lye at an anchor
    together;
As for their engine, they then could not use, because of the
    turbulent weather;
Yet at the last to diving they went, where silver and gold they
    received;
When in the water their breath was near spent they were by their
    engine relieved.

[VERSE 5]
Six weeks together they work’d in the cold, still diving in nine
    fathom water,
Loading their Mary with silver and gold; then up to fair London
    they brought her,
Where they received her with delight, as you may observe by the
    ditty,
And they unloaded her cargo in sight of many brave men of the city.
Carts heavy loaden came through the town, on which the whole
    multitude gazed;
This to the seamen hath purchac’d renown, no question but they may
    be praised:
Still far and near their fame let it ring, and let them be highly
    commended,
Since they did venture so hard in this thing, and was with a
    blessing attended.

[VERSE 6]
But here is one thing we must not forget: while they were the
    treasure possessing,
On the great rocks they might soon have been split had not Heaven
    yielded a blessing;
Or while they search’d the depth of the main, to hazards they could
    be no strangers;
Yet men and boys came all safe home again, tho’ they had gone
    through such dangers.

--- TITLE: The Boatswain’S Call; Or, The Couragious Marriner’S Invitation To All His Brother Sailers To Forsake Friends And Relations For To Fight In The Defence Of Their King And Country [item: PG76941-pg76941-041]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 8116-8187
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Stout seamen, come away, never be daunted;
For if at home you stay, then is it granted
The fleet can never be mann’d for the ocean,
To fight the enemy and gain promotion.

[VERSE 2]
Lewis, that Christian Turk, makes preparation;
His engines are at work in consultation,
Thinking to ruin quite all Christian princes;
But we their wrongs will right, at life’s expences.

[VERSE 3]
The mighty force of France we never value;
For when we once advance we will not dally,
But on the ocean wide (through blest permission)
We’ll soon subdue their pride and grand ambition.

[VERSE 4]
Therefore with courage bold, boys, let us venture;
Like noble hearts of gold now freely enter
Your names on board the fleet, all friends forsaking,
That we may soon compleat this undertaking.

[VERSE 5]
Is it not that the land might be defended
By a victorious hand? tho’ France intended
To lay a heavy yoke on a free nation,
Boys, let a fatal stroke prove their vexation!

[VERSE 6]
But yet methinks I hear some cowards crying,
The press they dread and fear as much as dying,
And sculk, like frighted slaves, here in distraction,
To hide in dens and caves from warlike action.

[VERSE 7]
Yet some declare they’d fight, but a dear mother,
Who counts him her delight above all other,
She loves him as her life; parting would grieve her:
Another has a wife, he’s loath to leave her.
Thus cowards they can find excuses many
To tarry here behind; yet there’s not any
Right valiant noble soul heeds a relation,
He’ll fight against controul for this his nation.

[VERSE 8]
Has not men wish’d and cry’d, ‘A war with France!’ boys,
That on the ocean wide we may advance, boys?
To storm and shake their throne, no danger fearing:
This still has been their tone oft in my hearing.

[VERSE 9]
Where are those heroes now, those sons of thunder,
That would make Lewis bow and bring him under?
Your wishes now you have, France is the center;
Like seamen stout and brave, boys, freely venture!

[VERSE 10]
In a fight fierce and hot once was I wounded;
We receiv’d showrs of shot, being surrounded;
Yet I again will go, and scorn to hide me;
I’ll face the daring foe, what e’er betide me.

[VERSE 11]
He that has been in fight fears not another;
He leaves with much delight father and mother,
To embrace those true joys which men admire;
We can be merry, boys, in smoak and fire.

[VERSE 12]
If we the conquest gain, that brings promotion;
If we by chance are slain, then the wide ocean
Shall be our watry tomb, near Neptune’s palace.
This, boys, shall be our doom, in spite of malice.

--- TITLE: The Undaunted Seaman [item: PG76941-pg76941-042]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 8188-8262
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
‘My love, I come to take my leave, yet prithee do not sigh and
    grieve,
On the wide ocean I will fight, for to maintain the nation’s right:
Under noble chief commanders I resolve to take my chance;
  On board I’ll enter, life I’ll venture, to subdue the pride of
      France.’

[VERSE 2]
‘My dear,’ said she, ‘be not unkind, I shall no peace nor comfort
    find;
My very heart will break for thee, if thus we must divided be:
While thou art with foes surrounded, where the loud-mouth’d cannons
    roar,
  This warlike action breeds distraction, I shall never see you
      more.’

[VERSE 3]
‘Let no such fear attend my dear, I hope to be as safe as here;
For King and country’s good I’ll stand, and vow to fight with heart
    and hand.
None but cowards fear to venture, freely will I take my chance;
  On board I’ll enter, life I’ll venture, to subdue the pride of
      France.’

[VERSE 4]
The youthful damsel then did cry, ‘I’ll part with gold and silver
    too,
Another person to employ, that may be better spared than you.
Never shall I be contented while you leave your native shore
  This warlike action breeds distraction, I shall never see you
      more.’

[VERSE 5]
‘My dear, all hazards will I run, methinks the work cannot be done
Except I do in person go to face that perjur’d potent foe:
We have warlike sons of thunder, which will valiantly advance
  To the wide ocean for promotion and to check the pride of France.

[VERSE 6]
‘My dear, the royal English fleet, with the Dutch navy, will
    compleate
The work which fairly is begun: we fear not but Monsieur will run;
For we’ll drive the rogues before us, teach them such an English
    dance:
  While they retire, still we’ll fire, check the growing pride of
      France.’

[VERSE 7]
With sighs and tears this damsel said, ‘If you resolve to go to sea,
In sailor’s robes I’ll be array’d and freely go along with thee;
Life and fortune I will venture rather than to stay on shore:
  Grief will oppress me, and possess me, that I ne’er shall see
    thee more.’

[VERSE 8]
Said he, ‘My dearest, stay on land, such idle fancies ne’er pursue;
Thy soft and tender milk-white hand aseaman’s labour cannot do:
Here I leave both gold and treasure to maintain my dear on shore.’
  But still she crying, and replying, ‘I shall never see thee
      more!’

[VERSE 9]
‘Thy gold’s no more than dross to me, alas! my heart is sunk full
    low,
The want of thy sweet company will surely prove my overthrow:
Therefore, dearest, do not leave me, here tormented on the shore;
  Let us not sever, love, for ever, lest I ne’er shall see thee
      more!’

[VERSE 10]
Tho’ bitterly she did complain, her sighs and tears were all in vain;
He would not suffer her to go, so many cares and griefs to know:
But with sweet salutes they parted; she was left with tears on shore;
  Here often crying, and replying, ‘I shall never see him more!’

--- TITLE: The Sea-Man’S Adieu To His Dear [item: PG76941-pg76941-043]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 8263-8402
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
This man was prest to serve upon the seas,
Which did his dearest very much displease;
She importuned the captain on her knee,
And proffered gold to have her love set free;
But all would not prevail; the captain’s ear
Was deaf, the maid’s complaint he would not hear.
  When no entreaty could move his hard heart
  She sadly took her leave, and so they part.

[VERSE 2]
Come, all loyal lovers that’s faithful and true,
  Observe, where ever you be,
A pattern I here have presented to you:
  It is good to be constant, you see.

[VERSE 3]
But chiefly to thee, my own dearest, I speak,
  With patience my absence to bear,
For now I am prest to serve on the seas,
  And I must bid adieu to my dear.

[VERSE 4]
Our King must have seamen and souldiers most stout,
  His enemies’ heart for to fear,
And I for my honour will venture about,
  And I must bid adieu to my dear.

[VERSE 5]
# APPARATUS: MAID.
O tell me not so, mine own dearest, I pray;
  For love’s sake take pitty on me;
I’le do my endeavour to please thee alway
  If that I may have my love free.

[VERSE 6]
’Tis far better staying with me on the shore,
  Where pleasures and joys do abound,
Than for you to venture where cannons do roar,
  In the depth of the seas to be drown’d.

[VERSE 7]
O be not so cruel, my love, for to fight,
  But tarry, my dearest, with me;
We’l find out a way in Love’s war for to fight,
  And I’le strive for to set my love free.

# APPARATUS: MAN.

[VERSE 8]
All that thou canst do, my love, will not procure
  My freedom, I sorely do fear;
But I must the hardship of service endure,
  And I must bid adieu to my dear.

[VERSE 9]
My captain by no means will let me go free,
  He likes me so well, I do hear;
Therefore it’s in vain to beg my liberty,
  For I must bid adieu to my dear.

[VERSE 10]
# APPARATUS: MAID.
I’le go to thy captain and fall on my knee;
  Perhaps he’l take pitty on me;
If five pounds or ten pounds will buy thy discharge
  He shall have it to set my love free.

# APPARATUS: THE CAPTAIN’S ANSWER.

[VERSE 11]
Not ten pounds nor twenty will buy his discharge,
  Fair maid, you must patiently bear;
He shall go to sea for his King to ingage,
  And he must bid adieu to his dear.

[VERSE 12]
I’le have him to serve me upon the salt main,
  In battel with foes for to fight;
Then cease, pritty maiden, and do not complain,
  For the wars is a souldier’s delight.

# APPARATUS: MAID.

[VERSE 13]
Behold, noble captain, the sorrowful tears,
  That down my cheeks trickle amain,
To move your hard heart to release me of fear
  And to grant me my love once again.

[VERSE 14]
No maiden’s heart ever was so full of woe,
  Then, good sir, take pitty on me;
And let him no further into the wars go,
  But be pleased to set my love free.

[VERSE 15]
# APPARATUS: CAPTAIN.
O cease thy suit, damsel, and be not so sad,
  Let reason thy mind now aswage;
Ten thousand such seamen must e’re long be had,
  All against the proud foes to engage.

# APPARATUS: MAN.

[VERSE 16]
My dearest, why dost thou the captain offend?
  Thou seest he by no means will yield;
And I am resolved my blood for to spend
  Upon the salt sea or in field.

[VERSE 17]
Therefore be contented, and cease thy sad moan,
  Take comfort, and do thou not fear;
If fortune befriend me, when as I am gone,
  I shall once again see mine own dear.

# APPARATUS: MAID.

[VERSE 18]
My dearest, since thou must be parted from me,
  And here must no longer remain,
The thought of thy love all my comfort shall be
  Until I do see thee again.

[VERSE 19]
Each hour for thy welfare to God will I pray,
  That He will in safety preserve
My own dearest lover by night and by day
  Whilst he on the ocean doth serve.
This token, I prethee, love, for my sake keep,
  Remember me when you it wear;
This parting kiss take, which doth cause me to weep,
  And so heavens bless mine own dear.

# APPARATUS: MAN.

[VERSE 20]
Adieu, my dear jewel: thy love I have found;
  Our parting doth grieve me full sore.
The drums they do beat, and the trumpets do sound,
  And I must stay no longer on shore.

--- TITLE: The Maidens Frolick; Or, A Brief Relation How Six Lusty Lasses Has Prest Full Fourteen Taylors On The Backside Of St. Clements, And The Other Adjacent Places [item: PG76941-pg76941-044]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 8403-8490
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Of late near the Strand, we well understand,
Six lasses that took a brisk frollick in hand;
’Twas thus, I profess, they in seaman’s dress,
Not far from the May-pole, resolved to press
    Fourteen taylors.

[VERSE 2]
Young Nancy she ty’d a sword by her side,
And she was resolved for to be their guide:
This young female crew, Kate, Bridget, and Prue,
And she that went formost was Lieutenant Sue,
    Pressing taylors.

[VERSE 3]
These maids by consent, their minds fully bent,
First thro’ the back side of St. Clements they went,
Where just in the street they a taylor did meet;
They prest him, and streight he fell down at their feet:
    ‘I’m a taylor.

[VERSE 4]
‘I tell you,’ said he, ‘I ne’er was at sea,
And therefore, kind gentlemen, pray set me free,
And pity these tears; I have liv’d forty years,
And never us’d weapon but bodkin and shears.
    I’m a taylor.’

[VERSE 5]
But Susan and they strait haul’d him away,
While Tom, the poor taylor, did sigh, beg, and pray;
Yet all was in vain, for they did him retain,
And told him that now he must fight on the main,
    Tho’ a taylor.

[VERSE 6]
Then to White Hart Yard they went with regard,
And there a poor taylor was labouring hard
Upon his shop-board. Nan drew out her sword,
Saying he must King William his service afford,
    Tho’ a taylor.

[VERSE 7]
The taylor did quake--nay, quiver and shake.
At length with a pitiful voice he did spake,
While tears down did run; he cry’d, ‘I’m undone.
I never did know the right end of a gun;
    I’m a taylor.’

[VERSE 8]
Then stout Boston Bess said, ‘Nevertheless
You must go with us, we’ve a warrant to press;
Then wave this excuse, and lay by your goose;
Such nimble young fellows may be of great use,
    Tho’ only a taylor.’

[VERSE 9]
And then, by report, they went to Round Court,
Where seven young taylors were making of sport,
Their hearts void of care, who when they come there,
These maids did catch napping, as Moss catch’d his mare,
    Seven taylors.

[VERSE 10]
They thought to resist, but Joan with her fist,
She thumpt them about till the taylors they pi ,
And then in a rage the rest did engage,
And brought them away to the round-house or cage,
    These poor taylors.

[VERSE 11]
With all might and main down to Dutchy Lane
These petticoat press-masters hurried again,
To press some they knew: ’twas Morgan and Hugh,
A couple belong’d to the cross-legged crew,
    And Welsh taylors.

[VERSE 12]
Then Morgan hur railes, crys, ‘Splutter-a-nails,
Hur newly come up to fair London from Wales;
Then pray cease your strife, hur has a young wife,
Besides hur was never yet kill’d in hur life.’
    A Welsh taylor.

[VERSE 13]
But yet, right or wrong, they brought ’em along,
And happen’d to meet with three more in the throng.
Then said lusty Jane, ‘You must serve King and Queen!’
And thus these stout females did press full fourteen,
    And all taylors.

--- TITLE: The Couragious Commander; Or, A Brief Relation Of That Most Noble Adventure Of Sir Cloudesly Shovell, In The Bay Of Dublin, On Good Fryday, In Bringing The Pellican Frigat Out Of Their Harbour In Triumph And Victory [item: PG76941-pg76941-045]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 8491-8561
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Now, noble brave boys, let the sweet trumpet sound,
While seamen with trophies of honour are crown’d;
For gracious King William they’ll fight till they dye,
And scorn from the face of a Tory to flye.
  Sir brave Cloudesly Shovell sail’d to Dublin Bay,
  And brought the brave Pellican frigat away.
Bold James and his Teagues they did stand and behold
Our noble commander, couragious and bold,
Who ventur’d just close to the banks of their shore
And laid the proud enemy sprawling in gore:
  With fire and sword, boys, we enter’d the bay,
  And brought the brave Pellican frigat away.

[VERSE 2]
Our noble commander first enter’d aboard,
On the Monmouth yacht; this did courage afford
To all the brave sailors of Protestant pride,
Who vow’d they wou’d venture to dye by his side;
  Then crossing the bar they enter’d the bay,
  And brought the brave Pellican frigat away.

[VERSE 3]
The Tory commander did fire amain,
While we did salute him with bullets again,
Till twenty or more of his rebells were kill’d.
Now when he our valour and courage beheld,
  He straight cut his cable to flye from the fray,
  But we brought the brave Pellican frigat away.
The Protestants’ goods they were sending for France;
By us they were stopt--ay, and taken by chance,
Which made the poor French-men to swear, fret, and frown,
To see our brave seamen of fame and renown,
  With what resolution our guns they did play,
  When we brought the brave Pellican frigat away.

[VERSE 4]
The Tories came down with their foot and their horse,
And with their old master lamented his loss;
And into the water a party did ride,
Discharging their pistols against our ship’s side;
  But like men of courage our guns we did play,
  And brought the brave Pellican frigat away.

[VERSE 5]
‘You damn’d English dogs,’ one proud Monsieur did cry,
But straight at his horse we a bullet let flye;
He was in a rage to find such salutes,
That straight he was forc’d to shake off his jack-boots;
  Then after the rebels our guns we did play,
  And brought the brave Pellican frigat away.
But here is one thing that is worthy of note:
Two Protestant boys they did wade to our boat;
We straight took them in, and their lives we did save:
An account of the fears of the rebels they gave.
  Our streamers we spread, and our flags did display,
  And brought the brave Pellican frigat away.

[VERSE 6]
This is but a rellish and taste of their doom;
Brave boys, we will down with the bullworks of Rome.
The rebels in France they may put their whole trust,
While we all their glory lay low in the dust.
  With fire and sword, boys, we’l enter the fray
  King William’s great army shall carry the day.

--- TITLE: The Seamen’S Victory; Or, Admiral Killegrew’S Glorious Conquest Over The French Fleet, In The Streights, As They Were Coming From Thoulon Towards Brest [item: PG76941-pg76941-046]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 8562-8645
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Here’s joyfull news came late from sea;
’Tis of a gallant victory
Which o’er the French we did obtain
Upon the throbbing ocean main.
As soon as e’er they found our rage
The rogues was glad to disengage.

[VERSE 2]
The French fleet sailing from Thoulon,
As we by letters understand,
To join with those that lay at Brest,
As some of them have since confest;
But our brave fleet with them did meet,
And made the Frenchmen soon retreat.

[VERSE 3]
Five ships, with others, did advance,
Being the very pride of France:
The Lewis, Dauphin, and the Sun,
With others which were forced to run.
As by this ditty you shall hear,
Brave English boys, the coast did clear.

[VERSE 4]
The French at first did brag and boast,
But we so wisely rul’d the roast,
Under our Admiral Killegrew,
That we engag’d and beat them too,
Declaring that we did not fear
The haughty rage of proud Monsieur.

[VERSE 5]
Our admiral bore up amain,
Resolving that he would maintain
A sharp and bloudy fight with those
Who dare King William’s crown oppose:
Then broad-sides streight began to roar,
Which laid the French in reeking gore.

[VERSE 6]
Right valiant seamen, fierce and bold,
Couragious noble hearts of gold,
All with a resolution bent,
Whole showers of shot to them they sent,
By which the French in hundreds fell:
Our guns did ring their passing-bell.

[VERSE 7]
We pour’d our shot on e’ery side,
‘’Tis bravely done,’ the captain cry’d.
‘Though sharp and bloudy be the fray,
The French are beat; we have the day.
True English boys, ’twas bravely done;
See how the Frenchmen run, they run.’

[VERSE 8]
Now while we did maintain the fight
Two French ships there we sunk downright,
And likewise have we taken three.
This crown’d our work with victory;
The noble, valiant Killegrew
After the rest do’s still pursue.

[VERSE 9]
The French-men they did soon retreat;
They were a shatter’d, torn fleet.
But if he shall them overtake
A prize of all the rest he’ll make;
Couragious boys are sail’d with him,
Who freely ventures life and limb

[VERSE 10]
Under the admiral’s command,
For to defend the native land.
May Heaven prosper still and bless
Our valiant soldiers’ good success,
That we hereafter may advance,
To shake the very crown of France.

--- TITLE: Torringtonia; Or, A New Copy Of Verses On The Late Sea Engagement [item: PG76941-pg76941-047]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 8646-8729
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
I sing not the battle (so fam’d) of Lepanto,
Nor what the Turks got by the siege of Otranto,
Nor the Spanish Armada so brave and gallanto,
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 2]
Nor how they were bang’d by invincible Drake,
Nor the courage and conduct of excellent Blake,
Nor of men that fought bravely when all was at stake,
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 3]
But a sort of sea-fight ’tween the French and Hollander,
Where th’ English had joyn’d, but that their commander-
In-chief wou’d not be a with- but a by-stander,
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 4]
The Dutch to the enemy boldly drew near,
But th’ admiral o’th English more wisely did steer,
For he thought it was safer to keep in the rear,
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 5]
Grafton (’twas said) came courageously in,
And by mauling the French great honour did win,
But Torr’ was resolv’d to sleep in a whole skin,
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 6]
Had each ship and its captain but been independant,
They’d certainly made a more glorious end on’t,
Then commanded by such a stout superintendant,
    Which nobody can deny.
Tyrrel and Dorrel did boldly stand to ’em
(Thinking to beat the French and to undo ’em),
But th’ Admiral only came thither to view ’em,
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 7]
And tho’ the French fleet was so little esteem’d,
And their courage and conduct despisable deem’d,
To wise Herbert they plainly invincible seem’d,
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 8]
Some ships too fool-hardy did headlong engage,
Which put the stout admiral in such a rage,
That nought but a whore could passion asswage,
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 9]
When the shot from the enemy flying at random
Slew the stout hero’s dog, that could no way withstand ’em,
His bitches desired their master to land ’em,
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 10]
’Twould make a man, much more a woman, agast, sir,
To see a dog kill’d ’twixt the leggs of his master,
Who much more deserv’d such a dismal disaster,
    Which nobody can deny.
Some say that he wanted both powder and ball.
Be that true or false, it was certainly all
One to him, whose courage was so very small,
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 11]
The Dutch at the enemy bravely did fire all,
Tho’ Arthur commanded the fleet to retire all,
For which if he be’nt hang’d we much shou’d admire all,
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 12]
Tho’ the French for a time may bluster and boast
Of the honour they won by Torrington lost,
Their courage will cool when our fleet’s on their coast,
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 13]
Not one town of theirs, nor two, three, nor four
Shall appease for the pranks they play’d on our shoar;
We have admirals now that will pay off the score,
    Which nobody can deny.

--- TITLE: England’S Triumph At Sea [1691] [item: PG76941-pg76941-048]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 8730-8795
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
A mighty great fleet, the like was ne’re seen
Since the reign of King William and Mary his Queen,
Design’d the destruction of France to have been:
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 2]
This fleet was compos’d of English and Dutch,
For ships, guns, and men there was never seen such;
Nor so little done, when expected so much:
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 3]
Eighty-six ships of war, which we capitall call,
Besides frigats and tenders, and yachts that are small,
Sayl’d out, and did little or nothing at all:
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 4]
Thirty-nine thousand and five hundred brave men,
Had they chanc’d to have met the French fleet, O then,
As they beat ’em last year, they’d have beat ’em agen:
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 5]
Six thousand great guns, and seventy-eight more,
As great and as good as ever did roar;
It had been the same thing had they left ’em ashore
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 6]
Torrington now must command ’em no more,
For we try’d what mettal he was made on before,
And ’tis better for him on land for to whore,
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 7]
For a bullet, perhaps, from a rude cannon’s breach,
Which makes no distinction betwixt poor and rich,
Instead of his dog might have ta’ne off his bitch,
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 8]
But Russell, the cherry-cheekt Russell, is chose
His fine self and his fleet at sea to expose;
But he will take care how he meets with his foes,
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 9]
For there was a lady he left on land,
To whom he had promised his heart and his hand,
Though in her youth she was otherwise mann’d,
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 10]
And why plump Russell who need never beg,
To move our compassion, goe venture a leg,
And break the heart of the good Lady Peg,
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 11]
We had sea-collonells o’ th’ nature of otter,
Which either might serve by land or by water,
Tho’ of what they have done we hear no great matter,
    Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 12]
In the month of May last they sailed on the main,
And now in September are come back again,
With the loss of some ships, but in battle none slain,
    Which nobody can deny.

--- TITLE: England’S Great Loss By A Storm Of Wind [item: PG76941-pg76941-049]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 8796-8850
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
You gentlemen of England fair,
Who live at home free from all care,
Little do you think or know
What we poor sailors undergo:
We whine and toil upon the waves,
We work like Turks or galley slaves.

[VERSE 2]
’Twas on November the second day
When first our admiral bore away;
Intending for his native shore,
The wind at west-south-west did roar,
Attended by a dismal sky,
And the seas did run full mountains high.

[VERSE 3]
The very first land that we did make,
It chanc’d to be the old Ram’s Head,
Which made us all rejoice around
To see our flag-stem in Plymouth Sound,
Stretching well over for Fishes Nose,
Thinking to fetch up in Hamose.

[VERSE 4]
The tide of ebb not being done,
She set strong to the westward run,
Which put us all in dread and fear,
To see our ships, they would not wear,
The wind and weather increased sore,
And drove nine sail of ships on shore.

[VERSE 5]
When we came to Northumberland Rock,
The Lyon, Lynx, and Antelope,
The Loyalty, and Eagle too,
The Elizabeth made all to rue:
She ran astern, and the line broke,
And sunk the Hardwick at first stroke.

[VERSE 6]
Now you shall hear the worst of all:
The largest ship had the greatest fall;
The great Coronation, and all her men,
Were all drown’d except nineteen;
The master’s mate, and eighteen more,
Got in their long boat safe on shore.

[VERSE 7]
As to our ships, we value not,
Had it not fallen to our sailor’s lot;
The greatest loss is to their wives
In losing of their husbands’ lives;
And to Old England it may be more
Than nine sail of ships on shore.

--- TITLE: Naval Warfare Of 1692 [item: PG76941-pg76941-050]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 8851-8946
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
To God alone let us all glory give,
By whose permission we poor mortals live,
And tho’ our enemies may swell with pride
He soon can compass them on every side.

[VERSE 2]
King William is the glorious instrument,
Which by the providence of God was sent
To save our drooping laws and liberty
From French and Popish cruel tyranny.

[VERSE 3]
When in dark gloomy cells the plot was laid
This free-born land and nation to invade,
Bold Brittain sail’d forthwith her royal fleet,
Which did the daring enemy defeat.

[VERSE 4]
Renowned Russell let them understand
That, for the honour of his native land,
Thro’ smoke and flame he could with courage go
To face proud Lewis, that insulting foe.

[VERSE 5]
No fear nor favour could his actions sway,
Nor could he in the least be drawn away
From acting like a noble hero bold,
For all the promised gifts of cursed gold.

[VERSE 6]
The valiant Ashby let them feel his rage,
While death he rid in triumph o’er the stage
Of the French navy on the ocean main,
And English boys did victory obtain.

[VERSE 7]
The spirits of the French began to faint,
So that they pray’d to ev’ry Popish saint
To help them in a time of sad distress;
Yet they were burnt and beaten ne’ertheless.

[VERSE 8]
Admiral Carter fought them through and through,
The like of him before they never knew;
His chain-shot did their ships in pieces tear,
As if great Jove with thunder had been there.

[VERSE 9]
Brave Delavall met with the Rising Sun
Of France, who to the shore for shelter run
With many more, which in a stately flame
He soon did set, our glory to proclaim.

[VERSE 10]
Sir Cloudsly Shovel, with a valiant heart,
In this most glorious conquest bore a part;
His roaring cannons sunk them in the main,
From whence they never can return again.

[VERSE 11]
The force of France he ne’er was known to fear,
But, like a stout commander, vow’d to clear
The seas of French, or they should make his grave
And monument in a rough roaring wave.

[VERSE 12]
The next was Rook, that brave, heroick soul,
Who none alive could ever yet controul;
A dozen men-of-war of France he burn’d,
Who e’er next day was all to ashes turn’d.
The French was follow’d to their very shore,
Pursu’d with guns, which did like thunder roar:
Such admirals before was never known;
They scar’d old Lewis--nay, and shook his throne.

[VERSE 13]
Nor were the valiant Dutch-men far behind:
They on the ocean bear a noble mind;
True sons of thunder, that will not retreat
Until they see their foes destroyed and beat.

[VERSE 14]
Tho’ they had once been wounded on the main,
Like soldiers, they resolved to bleed again,
Or bring the proud insulting tyrant low,
Who strives to seek all Europe’s overthrow.

[VERSE 15]
Those valiant souls let all good men commend;
Their lives they ventur’d freely to defend
Religion, laws, and likewise liberty:
’Tis better dye than live in slavery.

[VERSE 16]
But God above, I hope, will ever bless
Our arms by sea and land with good success,
That victories may constantly increase
Till war is swallow’d in a glorious peace.
Now for King William let all subjects pray,
That God would guard his person night and day;
From all false friends, and likewise open foes,
Let angels guard him wheresoe’er he goes.

--- TITLE: The Royal Triumph; Or, The Unspeakable Joy Of The Three Kingdoms For The Glorious Victory Over The French By The English And Dutch Fleets, To The Joy And Comfort Of All True Subjects [item: PG76941-pg76941-051]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 8947-9032
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Valiant Protestant boys,
          Here’s millions of joys
And triumph now bro ... ught from the ocean;
          For the French mighty fleet
          Now is shatter’d and beat,
And destruction, destruction, boys, will be their portion.

[VERSE 2]
          Here’s the Jacobite crew--
          Now believe me, ’tis true--
Invited the Fre ... nch to this nation;
          Who was crossing the seas,
          With the Teague Rapparees,
True cut-throats, true cut-throats, upon my salvation.

[VERSE 3]
          But, alas! they did find
          A true Protestant wind,
Which five weeks or lon ... ger it lasted,
          Till the most royal fleet,
          And the Dutch both compleat,
They with thunder, with thunder this project soon blasted.

[VERSE 4]
          On the nineteenth of May
          The French fleet made way,
To make of our cou ... rage a tryal;
          They suppos’d we’d ne’er fight,
          But they were’nt in the right,
For we show’d them, we show’d them we were true and loyal.

[VERSE 5]
          Our admirals bold,
          With their brave hearts of gold,
They fell on like bra ... ve sons of thunder;
          And their chain-shot let fly,
          As the fleet they drew nigh,
Where they tore them, and rent them, and tore them asunder.

[VERSE 6]
          Our squadron, true blew,
          Fought their way through and through;
At length in Lobs’ Po ... und, boys, we got ’um,
          Where we gave the proud French
          Such a fiery drench
That we sent them, we sent them straight down to the bottom.

[VERSE 7]
          Such a slaughter we made,
          While the loud cannons play’d,
Which laid the poor Mo ... nsieurs a-bleeding;
          Nay, their chief admiral
          We did bitterly maul,
And have taught him, I hope, better breeding.

[VERSE 8]
          Our brave admiral
          Being stout Dellaval,
Whose actions all m ... en may admire;
          For the French Rising Sun
          Was not able to run,
Which with seven, with seven more ships did he fire.

[VERSE 9]
          Valiant Rook sail’d straightway
          Where a French squadron lay
Close amongst the ro ... cks then for shelter;
          But we fell on galore,
          And we fir’d twelve more;
Thus we fir’d and burn’d the French fleet helter-skelter.
          Being sunk, took, and burn’d,
          There’s not many return’d,
Was this not a wo ... full disaster?
          How they far’d on our coast
          Let ’em sail home and boast
To old Lewis, old Lewis, their fistula-master.

[VERSE 10]
          When he hears how they sped
          It will strike him near dead,
Losing what he lo ... ng has been getting;
          But we’ll have him to know
          That we’ll still keep him low:
He shall never, shall never, boys, conquer Great Britain.

--- TITLE: Admiral Russell’S Scowering The French Fleet; Or, The Battle At Sea [item: PG76941-pg76941-052]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 9033-9097
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Thursday in the morn, the Ides of May,
  Recorded be for ever the famous ninety-two.
Brave Russel did discern by dawn of day
  The lofty sails of France advancing now.
‘All hands aloft, aloft; let English valour shine.
Let fly a culvering, the signal of the line;
  Let ev’ry hand supply his gun.
Follow me, and you’ll see
  That the battle will be soon begun.’

[VERSE 2]
Tourville o’er the main triumphant rowl’d
  To meet the gallant Russel in combat on the deep;
He led the noble train of heroes bold
  To sink the English admiral at his feet.
Now every valiant mind to victory does aspire;
The bloody fight’s begun, the sea itself on fire,
  And mighty Fate stood looking on
Whilst a flood all of blood
  Fill’d the port-holes of the Royal Sun.
Sulpher, smoak, and fire disturbed the air,
  With thunder and wonder to fright the Gallick shore;
Their regulated bands stood trembling near
  To see their lofty streamers now no more.
At six a clock the Red the smiling victor led,
To give a second blow, their total overthrow.
  Now death and horror equal reign;
Now they cry, tun, or dye!
  Brittish colours ride the vanquish’d main.

[VERSE 3]
See they run amaz’d thro’ rocks on sands:
  One danger they grasp at, to shun a greater fate.
In vain they crie for aid to weeping lands;
  The nimphs and sea gods mourn their lost estate.
For ever more adieu, thou dazling Royal Sun;
From thy untimely end thy master’s fate begun:
  Enough, thou mighty god of war.
Now we sing, ‘God bless the King,
  Let us drink to ev’ry English tar.’

[VERSE 4]
Come, jolly seamen, all with Russel go
  To sail on the main, proud Monsieur for to greet
And give our enemy a second blow,
  And fight Tourville if that he dare to meet.
Come, brother tar, what cheer? Let each his gun supply,
And thump ’em off this year, or make Mounsieur to fly
  While we do range the ocean round.
Day or night we will fight
  When our enemy is to be found.

[VERSE 5]
Let it ne’er be said that English boys
  Should e’er stay behind when their admiral goes;
But let each honest lad crie with one voice,
  ‘Brave Russel, lead us on to fight the foes.’
We’ll give them gun for gun, some sink and other burn.
Broad-sides we’ll give ’em too, till Monsieur crys, ‘Morblew!
  Des Engleteer vill kill us all.’
Whilst they scower we will pour
  Thick as hail amongst them cannon-ball.

--- TITLE: A Merry New Ballad On The Great Victory Over The French Fleet, May The 19Th 1692 [item: PG76941-pg76941-053]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 9098-9283
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
I sing ye a ballad as round me ye stand,
Which is for the honour of Old England:
    Old England, Old England;
Which is for the honour of Old England.

[VERSE 2]
In the month of May, the year ninety-two,
The Englishman did his old valour show:
    Old England, Old England, etc.

[VERSE 3]
We sent out our scouts the foe to descry
When Cape de Hague we were sailing by
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 4]
This was a good omen, we now understand,
And Lewis hates Hague by sea or by land:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 5]
But in our Channel the battel was fought,
And so the French fleet in a net was caught,
    Net was caught, net was caught;
And so the French fleet in a net was caught.

[VERSE 6]
Yet Monsieur, expecting that all was his own,
On Admirall Russell did boldly bear down:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 7]
He gave a broad-side, which was kindly took,
And then the Britannia in thunder spoke,
    Thunder spoke, thunder spoke,
And then the ‘Britannia’ in thunder spoke.

[VERSE 8]
Till in musquet shot she fires no gun,
In compliment then salutes the French Sun,
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 9]
And warms her sides so that for all her might
She fairly tows off, and bids us good night:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 10]
Thus have we been taught in a tale or old song,
French fury was never known to last long:
    Old England, etc.
When Tourville had given the signal to flye,
His squadrons, as ready, do westward, ho! ply:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 11]
Some of his lame geese, not able to bear
Their heads above water, to the bottom they steer:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 12]
The rest we pursue in their stragling flight,
And chase the poltrons most part of the night:
    Old England, Old England,
And hey! for the honour of Old England.

[VERSE 13]
The next morning was foggy; but when it grew clear
The chase was renew’d, and so was their fear:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 14]
We made all our sail, and gave ’em no rest.
From point to point drove ’em, from west to east:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 15]
Those coursers, so brisk at the starting-place,
Run heavily now through Alderney Race:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 16]
Into Cherburgh Bay three tall ones did run,
Where a northern blaze burns up the south Sun:
    Old England, etc.
’Twas Heath did this feat; and Greenway another,
For the Conquerant fell, in flames and in smother:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 17]
And Fowlis was daring, though he miss’d his prey;
He flew at the Sun, but stoopt by the way:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 18]
But now we are making for Bay Le Hogue,
Where on land, they say, are many a brogue:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 19]
These doughty wights, those true Irish Teagues
Won’t let us come near ’em by several leagues:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 20]
Such gallant alliance the French much imports;
They’ll save their friends’ ships, as they did their own forts:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 21]
But manning our boats, those wise ones we cozen,
And burn in this bay thirteen to the dozen:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 22]
This action’s far greater than that of Lepanto,
And merits alone a whole noble canto:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 23]
For, like the old Britains, our men did assail ’em
In open boats, and naked we quail ’em:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 24]
We storm’d their fore-castles, their decks we did scale,
And with their own canon we made ’em turn tale:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 25]
Earl Danby commanded the headmost boat,
Which was in a moment from under him shot:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 26]
Then a musquet ball does graze on his shin,
But still he goes on, more honour to win:
    Old England, etc.
Not a captain was here but toss’d up his brands;
The seamen were furies, with flames in their hands:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 27]
What bonfires we made on our Norman coast!
Where William the Conqueror rules the roast:
    Rules the roast, rules the roast;
Where William the Conqueror rules the roast.

[VERSE 28]
But now in all pomps, where great men appear,
The post of honour is still in the reer:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 29]
Brave Russel can never enough be prais’d;
Such trophies are owing as never were rais’d:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 30]
To his courage and conduct great honours are due:
To all of the flag; the Red, White, and Blew:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 31]
To Delaval, Almonde, Shovell, Ashby, Rook,
Whose names are all writ in Fame’s lasting book:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 32]
To Carter, the bold! who never can die;
He only i’th’ bed of honour does lie:
    Old England, etc.
His story is great, for he comes not an ace
Behind Withrington in Old Chevy Chace.
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 33]
Nay, he is before him, for he fought on his stumps,
With joy in his face and not doleful dumps:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 34]
Stout Hastings shall live; shall ever be famed,
With all our commanders, too long to be named:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 35]
What need we say more? there is no occasion;
This French does excell the Spanish invasion:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 36]
The downfall of Lewis le Grand is reckon’d
So far above that of Philip the Second:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 37]
’Twas in eight eight Queen Bess swept the main,
In ninety-two Queen Mary the same:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 38]
Now all English lads not enter’d their teens
Shall chant forth the praise of those Protestant Queens,
    Protestant Queens! Protestant Queens!
Shall chant out the praise of those Protestant Queens.
Our London merchants will now live at ease,
May trade without convoys all over the seas:
    Old England, etc.

[VERSE 39]
The New-Castle men may bring in their coals;
And never must Petres say Mass in Paul’s,
    Mass in Paul’s! Mass in Paul’s!
And never must Petres say Mass in Paul’s.

--- TITLE: The Valiant Seamen’S Courage [item: PG76941-pg76941-054]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 9284-9351
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Joyful tydings I bring; let us merrily sing
Till we make the whole nation with triumph to ring;
For an admiral, he, by his conduct at sea,
Now has made the poor French-men to come by the lee.
    This is but the beginning of what we intend
    For to shew them before the brave summer does end.
A detachment sent out bravely scour’d about
Till they put a whole fleet of French ships to the rout;
We were four or five sail, who to fight never fail,
And the one carry’d fiery flames in her tail.
    This, etc.

[VERSE 2]
To these merchants of France we did fairly advance;
So good was our fortunate, prosperous chance
That we put them in fear: to the shore they did steer,
While we follow’d with thundering shot in the reer.
    This, etc.
Some was sailing for Brest and St. Malo’s, we guest,
To fair Dunkirk with stores and provision the rest;
But their voyage we stay’d and fierce havock we made,
While our thundering cannons against them we play’d.
    This, etc.

[VERSE 3]
Quoth the frighted Mounsieur, ‘To de shore let us steer,
Here is coming five sail of de proud Englateer;
Now, begar, let us run from de noise of deir gun,
Or dey’ll serve us as dey did our dear Rising Sun.’
    Yet this is but a taste, boys, of what we intend
    For to give them before the brave summer does end.

[VERSE 4]
As they fled in disgrace still we mended our pace,
And, like true sons of thunder, we follow’d the chase,
Where in harbour near shore thirty-eight sail or more
We did set all on fire; in flames they did roar.
    This, etc.

[VERSE 5]
When our project did take, such a flame it did make,
Just as if the seas had been a fiery lake;
All their charges and cost of their cargo were lost:
Now was ever poor French-men so plaguely crost?
    This, etc.

[VERSE 6]
It was on the tenth day of this sweet month of May
When the valiant bold Britains did shew them this play,
And we make no great doubt, e’er the summer is out,
For to give them a sharp and more vigorous rout.
    This, etc.

[VERSE 7]
Boys, the work we’ll compleat with a most royal fleet,
For we valiant tarpollins do scorn to retreat;
Not a French-man we’ll spare; let them come if they dare
On the ocean, brave Russel will fight with them fair.
    This is but a beginning of what he intends
    For to shew them before the brave summer it ends.

--- TITLE: England’S Glory In The Behaviour Of Brave Killeygrove [item: PG76941-pg76941-055]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 9352-9397
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
All you that will be England’s friends, be you rich or be you poor,
Give ear to me and I’ll relate what happened in ninety-four.
’Twas in the month of December--mark well but what I say--
The Plymouth, with five frigates more, set sail out of Cales Bay.

[VERSE 2]
Brave Killeygrove was commodore, bound up into the Streights,
Where he lost his life with many more, and this was their hard fate.
When we came off the Cape Boner, two ships we did espy,
Which prov’d to be French men-of-war, and to us they drew nigh.

[VERSE 3]
They took us to be merchant-men, come down from the Levant,
From Smyrna or from Scanderoon, from Venice or Mercant,
Till bearing down before the wind, the truth of it to view,
They took us to be men-of-war, and they found it to be true.

[VERSE 4]
O, then they tack’d, and we stood after, as fast as we could hie,
But before it was full three o’clock to them we did draw nigh.
O, then bespoke brave Killeygrove, to his men both brisk and free,
‘I make no doubt but in little time our prizes they will be.’

[VERSE 5]
The French were not unwilling to fight, but to fire they did begin;
Then we gave them a whole broadside, which made their ears to ring.
We had not fir’d passing two broadsides, as I remember well,
But there came an unlucky shot, by which brave Killeygrove fell.

[VERSE 6]
Then Raleigh was the second man that did take up the sword;
And bravely he did manage it, as you may take my word.
We had not been engaged there not past one glass or two,
But that the Falmouth she came up, and she gave the last her due.
Next came the little Adventure up, and her guns she fir’d so true
She put Jack Frenchman to the rout, he knew not what to do.
We being quite disabled, the Carlisle she made way
After the biggest of the two, and she carry’d her the next day.

[VERSE 7]
But had our mast and tiller held, O! then they would have seen,
Notwithstanding, for all the Carlisle, our prizes they should
    have been.
But, to conclude, they were taken both, for all they were so bold,
And soon after they were carried into Marseilles Mold.

--- TITLE: An Excellent Song, Call’D The Frighted French; Or, Russel Scouring The Seas [item: PG76941-pg76941-056]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 9398-9457
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Russel on the ocean, minding Tourville’s motion,
      Made them to run at the noise of our guns,
        And Toulon shall be their portion;
      The French must trot it home by land,
      Whilst Russel on the seas command.
Sound the trumpet, beat the drum, while the French do run,
Sound the trumpet, etc., sound, etc., while the French do run
    still before us.

[VERSE 2]
      Now the spring’s a-coming, our English will be burning
      Your towns that be builded near the sea;
        You’ll find the sea-men booming;
      Then let your armies all advance,
      Yet we’ll lye on the coast of France,
Sounding trumpets, beating drum, while the towns do burn,
Sounding trumpets, etc., sounding trumpets, towns do burn unto
    ashes.

[VERSE 3]
      The Turk and the barbarian, how the English fleet do scare ’em
      And make them to know, before they do go,
        That the French shall dread and fear ’em.
      Now, Monsieur, bring out all you can;
      We’ll fight you ship or man to man.
Sound the trumpet, etc., sound, etc., man to man, we will fight
    ’em.
      Each brave English freeman will be a jolly seaman;
      With Russel we’ll go to fight the foe,
        For the honour of Old England.
      Let Tourville with his fleet then come;
      Some we’ll sink and some we’ll burn.
Gun for gun we’ll give them too, while they cry, ‘Morbleu!’
Gun for gun, etc., gun, etc., while they cry, ‘We are routed!’

[VERSE 4]
      The Turks they are much grieved, altho’ they still believed
      That the French fleet could the English beat,
        But now they are deceived;
      In Toulon they all do sneak and hide,
      Whilst Russel in the Straights doth ride,
Daring Tourville for to come, and bring out his fleet,
Daring Tourville, etc., daring, etc., bring out his fleet, for to
    fight us.

[VERSE 5]
      Since the French are frighted they by the world are slighted,
      For Russel the brave is resolved for to have
        The English nation righted;
      He cares not what the French can do,
      Since the Red squadron and the Blew
Are full resolved for to be masters of the sea,
Are full resolved for to be, are, etc., masters, etc., in spite of
    Monsieur.

--- TITLE: The Cæsar’S Victory [item: PG76941-pg76941-057]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 9458-9553
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
As we was sailing on the main,
Well laded with great store of gain,
We was in danger to be ta’en:
  Five pirates ships appeared,
Who sailed up with courage bold,
As if they would not be contrould;
But we brave noble hearts of gold
  Their courage never feared.

[VERSE 2]
We soon did understand their will,
And therefore used our chiefest skill,
Resolving there our blood to spill
  Rather than lose our Cæsar:
We vow’d she should not be their prey,
And therefore, boys, we show’d them play.
It was upon the Sabbath day:
  No pirates could appease her.

[VERSE 3]
The master, flourishing his sword,
Did comfort to us all afford,
Both seamen, souldiers then on board,
  True courage to awaken;
Then with one voice we all did cry,
‘We are resolved to make them fly,
Or in the Cæsar we will dye,
  Rather than to be taken.’

[VERSE 4]
Before the fight we this did do:
Our bread into the sea we threw,
To make room for the whole ship’s crew
  To fight and keep foes under:
This truth can never be deny’d,
We soon did quell their haughty pride
By giving them a full broadside:
  Our cannons roar’d like thunder.

[VERSE 5]
Full five long hours there we fought,
In the brave Cæsar, fierce and stout;
At length we put them to the rout
  Who aimed at our treasure:
We pour’d them in whole showers of lead,
So that they tumbled down for dead
And in the ocean made their bed,
  Where they may lie their leisure.

[VERSE 6]
Their admiral did want to be
Aboard of Cæsar, this we see,
That they might have rich plunder free,
  The thing which they delight in:
But yet there was not one that dare
To come on board of Cæsar there;
They knew their lives we would not spare,
  So fierce we was for fighting.

[VERSE 7]
Good Fortune she our courage crown’d,
Or else aboard on us they’d found
The sum of fourscore thousand pound,
  Besides all other lading:
Could they but once have seen us fall,
Their booty then had not been small,
Two hundred thousand pound in all;
  This would have spoil’d our trading.

[VERSE 8]
I hope we gave them all their due,
Yet sav’d our coyn and cargo too.
Believe me, this is perfect true,
  It is no feigned story:
For though our foes were five to one,
Yet we at last did make them run:
And when we see our work was done
  To God we gave the glory,

[VERSE 9]
Who did indeed our rights maintain;
For in this skirmish on the main
Of us there was but one man slain,
  And seven others wounded:
But those that sought our overthrow,
They lost a many more, we know.
Thus Providence did kindness show
  When we was so surrounded.

--- TITLE: A Copy Of Verses, Composed By Captain Henry Every, Lately Gone To Sea To Seek His Fortune [item: PG76941-pg76941-058]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 9554-9625
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come, all you brave boys, whose courage is bold,
Will you venture with me? I’ll glut you with gold.
Make haste unto Corona: a ship you will find,
That’s called the Fancy, will pleasure your mind.

[VERSE 2]
Captain Every is in her, and calls her his own;
He will box her about, boys, before he has done:
French, Spaniard, and Portuguese, the heathen likewise,
He has made a war with them until that he dies.

[VERSE 3]
Her model’s like wax, and she sails like the wind;
She is rigg’d, and fitted, and curiously trimm’d,
And all things convenient has for his design.
God bless his poor Fancy, she’s bound for the mine.

[VERSE 4]
Farewel, fair Plimouth, and Cat-Down be damn’d:
I once was part-owner of most of that land;
But as I am disown’d, so I’ll abdicate
My person from England to attend on my fate.

[VERSE 5]
Then away from this climate and temperate zone,
To one that’s more torrid, you’ll hear I am gone
With an hundred and fifty brave sparks of this age,
Who are fully resolved their foes to engage.
These northern parts are not thrifty for me;
I’ll rise the Anterise, that some men shall see
I am not afraid to let the world know
That to the South Seas and to Persia I’ll go.

[VERSE 6]
Our names shall be blazoned and spread in the sky,
And many brave places I hope to descry
Where never a French man e’er yet has been,
Nor any proud Dutchman can say he has seen.

[VERSE 7]
My commission is large, and I made it myself,
And the capston shall stretch it full larger by half;
It was dated in Corona, believe it, my friend,
From the year ninety-three unto the world’s end.

[VERSE 8]
I honour St. George, and his colours I were,
Good quarters I give, but no nation I spare;
The world must assist me with what I do want;
I’ll give them my bill when my money is scant.

[VERSE 9]
Now this I do say and solemnly swear:
He that strikes to St. George the better shall fare
But he that refuses shall suddenly spy
Strange colours aboard of my Fancy to fly.
Four chiviliges of gold in a bloody field,
Environ’d with green, now this is my shield;
Yet call out for quarter before you do see
A bloody flag out, which is our decree.

[VERSE 10]
No quarters to give, no quarters to take;
We save nothing living: alas! ’tis too late;
For we are now sworn by the bread and the wine,
More serious we are than any divine.

[VERSE 11]
Now this is the course I intend for to steer;
My false-hearted nation, to you I declare
I have done thee no wrong, thou must me forgive;
The sword shall maintain me as long as I live.

--- TITLE: Villany Rewarded; Or, The Pirate’S Last Farewel To The World [item: PG76941-pg76941-059]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 9626-9671
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Well may the world against us cry; for these our deeds most base,
For which, alas! we now must dye, death looks us in the face,
Which is no more than what’s our due, since we so wicked were,
As here shall be declar’d to you. Let pyrates then take care.

[VERSE 2]
We with our comrades, not yet ta’en, together did agree,
And stole a ship out from the Groyne, to roam upon the sea;
With which we robb’d and plundered too, no ship that we did spare.
Thus many a one we did undo. Let pyrats then take care.
Our ship being well stored then for this our enterprise,
One hundred and eighty men there was in her likewise:
We pillag’d all we could come nigh, no nation we did spare,
For which a shameful death we dye. Let pyrates then take care.

[VERSE 3]
We robb’d a ship upon the seas, the Gunsway call’d by name,
Which we met near the East Indies, and rifled the same;
In it was gold and silver store, of which all had a share;
Each man 600 pounds and more. Let pirates then take care.

[VERSE 4]
Thus for some time we liv’d and reign’d as masters of the sea;
Every merchant we detain’d and us’d most cruelly.
The treasures took, we sunk the ship, and those that in it were
That would not unto us submit. Let pirates then take care.

[VERSE 5]
Thus wickedly we every day liv’d upon others’ good,
The which, alas! we must repay now with our dearest blood;
For we on no one mercy took, nor any did we spare.
How can we then for mercy look? Let pirates then take care.
We thus did live most cruelly, and of no danger thought,
But we at last, as you may see, are unto justice brought
For outrages of villany, of which we guilty are,
And now this very day must dye. Let pirates then take care.

[VERSE 6]
Now farewel to this wicked world, and our companions too;
From hence we quickly shall be hurl’d to clear the way for you;
For certainly if e’re you come to justice, as we are,
Deserved death will be your doom. Then pirates all take care.

--- TITLE: A Satyr On The Sea-Officers; Or, A Long Prologue To A Short Play [item: PG76941-pg76941-061]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 9810-9913
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
# APPARATUS: By Sir H. S.
With Monmouth cap, and cutlace by my side,
Striding at least a yard at every stride,
I’m come to tell you, after much petition,
The Admiralty has given me a commission:
And now with Bully Tourville I’ll ingage,
And try my fortune on a floating stage.
What blustring tarr at this dares take offence,
While I stand thus to prove my just pretence?
Will he pretend to fight better than I?
Ad’s death I’d tell him, ‘Damn you, sir, you lye,’
And then I’d ask him how they fought at Rye.
Your Bantry business too was but a fetch,
Where you call’d running, battering at a stretch;
But you’ll reply your leaders were to blame,
While I condemn you all to bear the shame.
For who the Divel éer refus’d his meat
Because another had no mind to eat?
The Dutch were drunk, you barbarously say.
Pray, next, do you be drunk too, so you stay,
For ’twas your sober fighting lost the day.
Old Albemarle wou’d say that men of war
In navy stunk not half enough of tarr.
Your o’ergrown pages and attorney’s clerks
To fight and govern fleets are proper sparks.
Then let the spruce land-pirats be content
To swagger in their native element,
And let tarpawlings rule by my consent:
For things now look as if men took commission
To damn all discipline and sow sedition,
And fighting was the least of their ambition;
No matter who comes home with broken bones,
So you but come to touch the patacoons.
The pitch of honour is desire of money;
That paltry, coward vice has quite undone ye.
You court preferment on no other score
But to be poorly rich, or basely poor:
For who would not propose a trip to Spain
That has within his prospect double gain,
To line his pockets, and to save his skin?
For none must fight with merchants’ money in.
Your heads run round with Mexico and Sevil;
I wish this shipping plate was at the Devil.
Wou’d the good King had but a just relation,
What infamy, what sums ’t has cost the nation!
He’d quickly damn your trade of importation,
And add it to the Act of Navigation.
‘But how then shall we live?’ ye murm’rers say.
’S life! can’t you be content with double pay?
Shew us your twofold merit, sirs, I pray.
Some has got two commands by land and sea,
While one might safely swear, might one be free,
They’re neither flesh nor fish, nor good red herring,
Those are your coll’nels, captains with a murrain.
Boldly to those two elements y’aspire,
But at an awful distance then you fire.
A few there are, and they are very few,
To whom a fairer character is due.
Time was when captains went on there own errands,
And in their pockets carried their press warrants;
Now you imploy the villains of the fleet,
While you date from the Downs in Bedford Street.
But times are alter’d; ’tis not now as then,
For now you press the money, spare the men.
Those plain, dull fellows no such secrets found
To make press warrants worth a hundred pound.
It is our fate, our frailty, or disease,
To trust our honour in such hands as these:
Raw in their trade, their principles not right,
With hearts too tender, and with heads too light,
Too weak for council, and too nice to fight.
Their bodies are not made of battering-stuff,
Their cracknel carcasses not splinter-proof;
And yet will fairly tell a sailor’s tale,
But must attempt it in a coat of mail.
Some swaggering bully snaps me short, and swears,
‘Damn me, these fellows wou’d be kick’d downstairs!’
Sir, by your leave, do you but fight at sea,
And then kick down the Monument for me.
The Parliament may plague us with taxation,
But till they cure the grievance of the nation,
Monsieur will make the narrow seas his station.
Then what becomes of all our ancient rule,
Our right from Edgar, and command from Thule?
Believe me, sirs, it will be then confest,
Your flag a dishclout, and your claim a jest.
The hardy duke we mention’d, whose great name
Stretch’d the blown cheeks of trumpet-sounding fame,
Once boldly try’d what English men could do;
But such examples who dare now pursue?
A four daies’ fight he gloriously maintain’d,
And what he lost in blood in honour gain’d;
To keep that spotless he the ocean stain’d.
Each day he tack’d, and fought from sun to sun,
Against the odds at least of two for one;
Had ye been there, sirs, what wou’d ye have done?
He ne’er stood--‘Shall I, shall I keep a loof?’--
But fought as if his skin was cannon-proof;
Then all that can be said to do you right,
You’ll keep a wind as long as he did fight.

--- TITLE: The Sea-Martyrs; Or, The Seamen’S Sad Lamentation For Their Faithful Service, Bad Pay, And Cruel Usage [item: PG76941-pg76941-062]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 9914-10067
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Thus our new Government does subjects serve,
And leaves them this sad choice: to hang or starve.

[VERSE 2]
Good people, do but lend an ear,
And a sad story you shall hear--
A sadder you never heard--
Of due desert and base reward,
  Which will our English subjects fright
  For our new Government to fight.

[VERSE 3]
Our seamen are the onely men
That o’er the French did vict’ry gain;
They kept the foe from landing here,
Which would have cost the Court full dear;
  And when they for their pay did hope
  They were rewarded with a rope.

[VERSE 4]
The roaring canon they ne’er fear’d,
Their lives and bloud they never spar’d;
Through fire and flame their courage flew,
No bullets could their hearts subdue.
  Had they in fight but flincht at all
  King James had now been in Whitehall.

[VERSE 5]
Thus England, and our new King too,
Their safety to their valour owe;
Nay, some did ’gainst their conscience fight
To do some great ones too much right;
  And now, oh, barbarous tyranny!
  Like men they fought, like dogs they dye.

[VERSE 6]
Thousands of them their lives did lose
In fighting stoutly with their foes,
And thousands were so maim’d in fight
That ’twas a sad and piteous sight;
  And when they hop’d their pay to gain
  They have their labour for their pain.

[VERSE 7]
Their starving families at home
Expected their slow pay would come;
But our proud Court meant no such thing,
Not one groat must they have till spring;
  To starve all summer would not do,
  They must still starve all winter too.
It might a little ease their grief,
And give their mis’ry some relief,
Might they in trade ships outward go,
But that poor boon’s denied them too,
  Which is as much as plain to say,
  You shall earn nothing, nor have pay.

[VERSE 8]
Their poor wives with care languished,
Their children cried for want of bread,
Their debts encreast, and none would more
Lend them, or let them run o’th’ score.
  In such a case what could they doe
  But ask those who money did owe?

[VERSE 9]
Therefore some, bolder than the rest,
The officers for their own request;
They call’d ’em rogues, and said nothing
Was due to them untill the spring:
  The King had none for them, they said
  Their betters, they must first be paid.

[VERSE 10]
The honest seamen then replied
They could no longer want abide,
And that nine hundred thousand pound
Was giv’n last year to pay them round:
  Their money they had earnt full dear
  And could not stay another half-year.

[VERSE 11]
A council then they streight did call
Of pick-thanks made to please Whitehall,
And there they were adjudg’d to dye;
But no man knows wherefore, nor why.
  What times are these! Was’t ever known
  ’Twas death for men to ask their own?

[VERSE 12]
Yet some seem’d milder than the rest,
And told them that, their fault confest,
And pardon askt and humbly crav’d,
Their lives perhaps might then be sav’d;
  But they their cause scorn’d to betray
  Or own’t a crime to ask their pay.

[VERSE 13]
Thus they the seamen’s martyrs dyed,
And would not yield to unjust pride;
Their lives they rather would lay down
Than yield it sin to ask their own.
  Thus they for justice spent their blood
  To do all future seamen good.

[VERSE 14]
Wherefore let seamen all and some
Keep the days of their martyrdom,
And bear in mind these dismal times,
When true men suffer for false crimes;
  England ne’er knew the like till now,
  Nor e’er again the like will know.

[VERSE 15]
But now suppose they had done ill,
In asking pay too roughly, still
When ’twas their due and need so prest,
They might have pardon found at least;
  The King and Queen some mercifull call,
  But seamen find it not at all.

[VERSE 16]
To robbers, thieves, and felons they
Freely grant pardons ev’ry day;
Only poor seamen, who alone
Do keep them on their father’s throne,
  Must have at all no mercy shown:
  Nay, tho’ there wants fault, they’l find one.

[VERSE 17]
Where is the subjects’ liberty?
And eke where is their property?
We’re forc’d to fight for nought, like slaves,
And though we do we’re hang’d like knaves.
  This is not like Old England’s ways:
  ‘New lords, new laws,’ the proverb says.

[VERSE 18]
Besides the seamen’s pay, that’s spent,
The King for stores, ships, and what’s lent,
Does owe seven millions at the least,
And ev’ry year his debt’s encreast;
  So that we may despair that we
  One quarter of our pay shall see.

[VERSE 19]
Foreigners and confederates
Get poor men’s pay, rich men’s estates;
Brave England does to ruine run,
And Englishmen must be undone.
  If this trade last but one half-year
  Our wealth and strength is spent, I fear.

[VERSE 20]
God bless our noble Parliament,
And give them the whole government,
That they may see we’re worse than ever,
And us from lawless rule deliver;
  For England’s sinking, unless they
  Do take the helm, and better sway.

--- TITLE: Advice To Young Maidens In Chusing Of Husbands [item: PG76941-pg76941-063]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 10068-10114
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
You pretty maids of Greenwich, of high and low degree,
Pray never fix your fancys on men that go to sea;
The seamen’s wives lead careful lives when at the very best,
For, in my mind, in stormy wind they can take but little rest.
Besides the many dangers that are upon the seas,
When they are on the shore they will ramble where they please;
For up and down in sea-port town they court both old and young:
They will deceive; do not believe the sailor’s flattering tongue.

[VERSE 2]
I give you this advice now, as you may understand,
It being at the time when seamen come to land,
For up and down in Greenwich town the seamen they do trade,
And he doth boast that spends the most; oh! he’s a jolly blade.
They likewise treat their sweet-hearts when they are on the shore,
But when they are gone perhaps you may never see them more;
To-day they wed, at night they bed, to-morrow go to sea:
Therefore I say, as well I may, a landman still for me.

[VERSE 3]
The seamen they are gone to sea, and leave there wives at home,
To take what care they can; for there parts they’l take none;
They tell their friends they do depend upon their husbands’ pay,
And run in debt, while they expect their money every day.

[VERSE 4]
Suppose you have a sailor, that sails before the mast;
If he’s the best of husbands his breath is but a blast:
The roaring waves their wills will have--there’s no man can
    withstand--
And he may sleep in the ocean deep whilst you are on the land.

[VERSE 5]
Suppose you have a captain, a person of great fame;
Yet still there is great danger in sailing on the main.
The fates unkind in stormy wind may lay his honour low,
And then his wife, with careful life, laments his overthrow.

[VERSE 6]
Give me an honest tradesman, of high or low degree;
I’ll never fix my fancy on a man that goes to sea.
A tradesman’s wife’s a happy life, if he’s an honest man:
He’ll take a share in all the care; deny it if you can.

--- TITLE: The Seamen’S Wives’ Vindication; Or, An Answer To The Pretended Frolick Which Was Said To Be By Them Over A Bowl Of Punch [item: PG76941-pg76941-064]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 10115-10174
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
You writ that we drank liquor free, but for your writing so
You are to blame--nay, blush for shame--since it was nothing so.

[VERSE 2]
Why does the poets abuse us, we that are seamen’s poor wives?
Have they not cause to excuse us, knowing our sorrowful lives?
We are, alas! broken-hearted, as we can very well prove,
When from our joys we are parted, those loyal husbands we love.
You that declare we are jolly do but abuse us, we find,
For we are most melancholly, always tormented in mind:
While that our husbands are sailing on the tempestuous seas
Here we are sighing, bewailing; nothing affordeth us ease.

[VERSE 3]
Here you have newly reported that we are girls of the game,
Who do delight to be courted. Are you not highly to blame,
Saying we often are merry, punch is the liquor we praise,
Though we are known to be weary of these our sorrowful days?
How could you say there was many wives that did drink, rant, and
    sing,
When I protest there’s not any of us that practice this thing?
Are we not forced to borrow, being left here without chink?
’Tis in a cup of cold sorrow if we so often do drink.

[VERSE 4]
Tho’ we have little to nourish us while our husbands are there,
Merchants in London they flourish through their industrious care.
They are the stay of the nation, men of undaunted renown;
Why should a false accusation run the poor seamen’s wives down,

[VERSE 5]
Saying we swallow’d our liquor with a great gossipping crew,
Making our tongues to run quicker then they had reason to do?
Thus they would blast all our glory by the soft wits of their brains.
He that invented that story was but a fool for his pains.

[VERSE 6]
We are so far from such pleasure, making of jolly punch-bowls,
That we lament out of measure, every woman condoles;
When she in bed should lye sleeping, if the high winds they do roar,
There she in sorrow is weeping, fearing to see him no more.

[VERSE 7]
They are to dangers exposed, as we may very well guess.
How can our eye-lids be closed in such a time of distress?
You that are free from that terror, having your husbands secure,
Little consider the horror that we do dayly endure.

[VERSE 8]
Tho’ there is joy in our meeting when they come safe from the main,
Yet ’tis a sorrowful greeting when we are parted again:
Landmen in a full fruition feeds on the fat of the land;
This is a happy condition, having all things at command.

[VERSE 9]
Tho’ we have not such a plenty, yet I can very well prove
That there is not one in twenty but who her husband doth love:
You that have caus’d those distractions, writing a story not true,
May be asham’d of your actions, and thus I bid you adieu.

--- TITLE: Billy The Midshipman’S Welcome Home [item: PG76941-pg76941-065]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 10175-10267
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

# APPARATUS: MOLLY.

[VERSE 1]
You’re welcome, my Billy, to the English shore;
I hope you’ll not cross the rough seas any more.
Many a day too, and many a night,
My heart grieved sore ’cause you were out of sight;
But now, to my comfort, I see you again.
Oh, never, dear Billy, Oh, never, dear Billy,
    Sail more on the main.

# APPARATUS: BILLY.

[VERSE 2]
Dear Molly, said Billy, the joy of my heart,
Daily I thought of you since we did part;
And when the roaring waves mounting high they did move,
In the greatest danger I thought on my love.
The billows did foam, and the rocks they were nigh,
Yet nothing but death, yet nothing but death
    Shall my love part and I.

# APPARATUS: MOLLY.

[VERSE 3]
I thank thee, my dear, for thy firm love to me
In the midst of thy dangers upon the rough sea;
Each night in my bed still as down I was lain
I dreamed of shipwracks upon the salt main;
But now I do find from these dangers I’m free,
Since him that I love, since him that I love
    Is come safe unto me.

# APPARATUS: BILLY.

[VERSE 4]
Indeed, my dear Molly, the Powers above
Preserv’d me from dangers for thy tender love,
For I have been where thundering cannons did roar,
Their bullets like footballs flying from the shoar;
The danger of tempest and cannon balls too
I have undergone, I have undergone
    For the sake, love, of you.

# APPARATUS: MOLLY.

[VERSE 5]
My dearest, it’s true, for the fault is in me,
For thou wouldst have wed, but I said, ‘Go to sea.’
But when thou wert gone how my heart was opprest!
I scarce had a minute of pleasure and rest,
For by day all my fear was of danger to thee,
And by night I did dream, and by night I did dream
    Still of storms on the sea.

# APPARATUS: BILLY.

[VERSE 6]
My dear, thou dreamst right, for e’re we got home
For several days we had storm after storm.
We lost all our masts and our tackle to boot,
In tempestuous nights on the ocean did float.
But, thanks unto Heaven, we had no men lost,
And the brave Royal Sov’rain, the brave Royal Sov’rain
    Come safe to our coast.

# APPARATUS: MOLLY.

[VERSE 7]
Oh my dear precious, my Billy, my joy,
There’s nothing my happiness now can destroy;
For since thou art safe from all cannon and storms
Thy person to me has a million of charms.
Oh, stay then on shore; never venture again
Upon the rough seas, upon the rough seas,
    But with me, love, remain.

# APPARATUS: BILLY.

[VERSE 8]
Thy love unto me now is dearer than life,
And happie am I since thou wilt be my wife,
And while I’m on shore still with thee I will stay,
Imbracing thy charms, love, by night and by day,
Till our admiral doth sail with the fleet on the main;
Yet kind Providence, I hope, yet kind Providence, I hope,
    Brings me safe back again.

--- TITLE: Admiral Benbow [item: PG76941-pg76941-066]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 10268-10312
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Oh, we sail’d to Virginia, and thence to Fayal,
Where we water’d our shipping, and then we weigh’d all.
Full in view on the seas, boys, seven sails we did espy;
Oh, we manned our capstan and weigh’d speedily.

[VERSE 2]
The first we came up with was a brigantine sloop,
And we ask’d if the others were as big as they look’d;
But turning to windward as near as we could lie,
We found there were ten men-of-war cruizing by.

[VERSE 3]
Oh! we drew up our squadron in very nice line,
And boldly we fought them for full four hours’ time;
But the day being spent, boys, and the night coming on,
We let them alone till the very next morn.

[VERSE 4]
The very next morn the engagement prov’d hot,
And brave Admiral Benbow receiv’d a chain shot;
And when he was wounded to his merry men he did say,
‘Take me up in your arms, boys, and carry me away.’

[VERSE 5]
Oh! the guns they did rattle, and the bullets did fly,
But Admiral Benbow for help would not cry.
‘Take me down to the cockpit; there is ease for my smarts.
If my merry men see me it will sure break their hearts.’

[VERSE 6]
Our brave Captain Crosbie proved coward at last,
For he stood at bo-peep behind the main mast;
He stood at bo-peep and did quiver and shake
For fear that those French dogs his dear life should take.

[VERSE 7]
The very next morning, by break of the day,
They hoisted their top sails and so bore away;
We bore to Port Royal, where the people flocked much
To see Admiral Benbow carried to Kingston Church.

[VERSE 8]
Come, all you brave fellows, wherever you’ve been,
Let us drink to the health of our King and our Queen;
And another good health to the girls that we know,
And a third in remembrance of brave Admiral Benbow.

--- TITLE: The Death Of Admiral Benbow [item: PG76941-pg76941-067]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 10313-10389
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come, all ye seamen bold, lend an ear, lend an ear,
Come, all ye seamen bold, lend an ear:
’Tis of our admiral’s fame,
Brave Benbow called by name,
    How he fought on the main you shall hear, you shall hear,
    How he fought on the main you shall hear.

[VERSE 2]
Brave Benbow he set sail for to fight, for to fight,
Brave Benbow he set sail for to fight;
Brave Benbow he set sail
With a sweet and pleasant gale;
    But his captains they turned tail in a fright, in a fright,
    But his captains, etc.

[VERSE 3]
Says Kirby unto Wade, ‘I will run, I will run,’
Says Kirby unto Wade, ‘I will run.
I value not disgrace,
Nor the losing of my place;
    For my enemies I’ll not face with a gun, with a gun,
    For my enemies,’ etc.

[VERSE 4]
’Twas the Ruby and Noah’s Ark fought the French, fought the
    French,
’Twas the Ruby and Noah’s Ark fought the French;
For there was ten in all,
Poor souls, they fought them all;
    They valued them not at all, would not flinch, would not flinch,
    They valued them, etc.

[VERSE 5]
Hard fortune that it was, by chain shot, by chain shot,
Hard fortune that it was, by chain shot,
Our admiral lost his leg,
And of his men did beg,
    ‘Fight on, my British boys; ’tis my lot, ’tis my lot;
    Fight on,’ etc.

[VERSE 6]
While the surgeon dressed his wounds thus he said, thus he said,
While the surgeon dressed his wounds thus he said:
‘Let my cradle now in haste
On the quarter-deck be placed,
    That mine enemies I may face till I’m dead, till I’m dead,
    That mine enemies,’ etc.

[VERSE 7]
And there bold Benbow lay, crying, ‘Boys,’ crying, ‘Boys,’
And there bold Benbow lay, crying, ‘Boys,’
‘Let us tack about once more;
We’ll drive them all on shore:
    I value not a score, nor their noise, nor their noise,
    I value not a score,’ etc.

[VERSE 8]
Unsupported thus he fought, nor would run, nor would run,
Unsupported thus he fought, nor would run
Till his ship was a mere wreck,
And no man would him back,
    For the others would not slack to fire a gun, fire a gun,
    For the others, etc.

[VERSE 9]
For Jamaica then at last he set sail, he set sail,
For Jamaica then at last he set sail,
Where Wentworth he did try,
And those cowards that did fly
    And from the French in fright turned tail, turned tail,
    And from the French, etc.

[VERSE 10]
And those found most to blame, they were shot, they were shot,
And those found most to blame, they were shot;
Brave Benbow then at last,
For grief of what was past,
    In a fever died at last, by hard lot, by hard lot,
    In a fever, etc.

--- TITLE: The Sailors Account Of The Action At Vigo [item: PG76941-pg76941-068]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 10390-10481
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Muse will have her song; hark! she merrily sings,
The praise of a Queen that has beaten two Kings:
Of Ormond and Rook too, and how they fell on,
And flat as a flounder laid Monsieur and Don.
Bright Eugene and Marlborough shou’d live in our rime,
And other brave heroes too, had we but time:
But heroes excuse us, for now Muse and I go,
To raise to the stars the dead-doers at Vigo.
    You Monsieurs and Dons, if with losses you meet,
    Yet don’t be discourag’d, we’ll pay off your fleet.
Cries a hawk from the wing, the eagle-ey’d Hardy,
Game! game! royal game! we shall take ’em all tardy:
In Vigo they ride, men of war, galleons,
The might of the Monsieurs and pride of the Dons:
Lead on, great commander, sink, burn, take the Plate;
’Twill all be our own, if we don’t come too late.
We’ll brisk up old England with fame and with plunder:
We’ll win’t, tho’ we charge thoro’ lightning and thunder.
    You Monsieurs and Dons, if with losses you meet,
    Yet don’t be discourag’d, we’ll pay off your fleet.

[VERSE 2]
Sir George sends the news to the stout Hogen Mogen,
Then squadrons we join without any proroguing:
Soon Vigo we reach, where a deodand cloak,
A cloke sent from heaven, wraps us and our oak.
Unseen we consult, and resolve to break in,
But not with our first rates, least the brine be too thin:
On the thirds high in view, are the first rate commanders,
This rums the brisk seamen, and brandys the landers:
    You Monsieurs and Dons, if with losses you meet,
    Yet don’t be discourag’d, we’ll pay off your fleet.

[VERSE 3]
My dear Baladina, let’s stop and take breath:
One glass and no more then; for halting is death.
Here’s a health to the Queen. I’ll pledg’t; one had said,
Sir, speech up your men that they may’nt be afraid.
Afraid? And a speech? says a sailor there by,
Sir, you slander the fleet, and your country bely.
Let cowards be speecht, that spur is here vain;
The English need rather the curb and the rein.
    You Monsieurs and Dons, if with losses you meet,
    Yet don’t be discourag’d, we’ll pay off your fleet.

# APPARATUS: The Second Part.

[VERSE 4]
Great Ormond first lands with his jolly marines,
Then fit to serve Anna the greatest of Queens:
In order they march, two thousand and all,
All handsom young men, all lusty and tall.
Of the Dons and their guns they do but make sport,
Defy their whole army, and ravish their fort:
They had blockt up their port with mast, cable, and chain,
But Hobson soon taught ’em ’twas labour in vain.
    You Monsieurs and Dons, if with losses you meet,
    Yet don’t be discourag’d, we’ll pay off your fleet.

[VERSE 5]
Your boom is now cut, and your fort is now taken,
And now, rogues, where are you? Now where is your bacon?
Your Shaterino, we shall make him to skip;
But, scorning to yield her, he burns his tall ship:
’Twas a forest alone, ’twas a new Rising Sun,
But alas! this must set, as the former had done.
Surviving confounders against us still roar,
Excuse them this once and they’ll do so no more.
    You Monsieurs and Dons, tho’ with losses you meet,
    Yet don’t be dismay’d, we have paid off your fleet.

[VERSE 6]
Now after work, wages, we’ll laugh and relate,
O, what a rich cordial is plunder and plate!
Both Monsieurs and Dons had been many moons rigging
And thousands of hands many years had been digging:
But (O, ’tis to them a sad tale to be told!)
For us ’twas they rigg’d, and digg’d silver and gold.
The dreadful now quake, and the poor galleons
Surrender rich cargo to tars and dragoons.
    But what is’t to us if with losses they meet?
    If we had their money, we paid off their fleet.

[VERSE 7]
O, Britain, be thankful for such a good Queen!
The like since great El’zabeth never was seen:
Be thankful for statesmen who don’t rob and starve us;
For sea and land worthies that fight to preserve us:
Be thankful for Ormond, the Churchills, and Rook;
But yet, let me tell you, God never will brook
Your cursing and swearing, your lying and cheating;
These winds are contrary, they’ll hinder defeating.
    Let Lewis repent too; for what can he gain,
    Who looses his soul for the kingdoms of Spain.

--- TITLE: On The Sea Fight Between Sir G. R. And Toulouse, 1704 [item: PG76941-pg76941-069]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 10482-10520
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Who does not extol our conquest marine?
    Courage and conduct, Rook and Tolouse,
’Twas the sharpest engagement that ever was seen.
    Courage, etc.
An action so glorious was never yet known,
    Courage, etc.,
Where no ship was taken, and no trophy won.
    Courage, etc.
’Tis plain that the French by Sir George were out-shot.
    Courage, etc.
They only th’ advantage, we victory got.
    Courage, etc.
Their fleet a whole day we did terribly maul,
    Courage, etc.,
And pursued them two more without pouder or ball.
    Courage, etc.
The flag-man that madly the close fight began,
    Courage, etc.,
Had lost all his squadron and not sav’d a man,
    Courage, etc.,
Had not the cool admiral, to prudence inclin’d,
    Courage, etc.,
The distance maintain’d in spight of the wind.
    Courage, etc.
We conquer’d the French, but had they been beat,
    Courage, etc.,
Our conquest, tho’ glorious, had been more compleat
    Courage, etc.
If our hero aboard no laurels has got,
    Courage, etc.,
Yet he triumphs at home and is victor by vote.
    Courage, etc.

--- TITLE: A Song On The Same [item: PG76941-pg76941-070]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 10521-10535
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
As brave Sir Rooke Tholouse did beat,
  So brave Tholouse beat him;
But whensoe’er they meet again
  George will his jacquet trim.
They both did fight, they both did beat,
  They both did run away;
They both did strive to meet again
  The quite contrary way.

--- TITLE: The Sailor’S Tragedy; Or, The Last Farewel Of Captain Smith [item: PG76941-pg76941-071]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 10536-10592
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
I am in a consternation at my now approaching death;
It’s my woful lamentation e’re I do resign my breath
I shall write this fatal morning, which I mean to leave behind.
Let my ruine be a warning evermore to all mankind.

[VERSE 2]
Often have I sail’d the ocean, with a proud, aspiring heart,
Aiming still at high promotion, far above my due desert.
Having lost my first commission, I cou’d not be satisfy’d
Till the steps of grand ambition led me to the fall of pride.

[VERSE 3]
Wholesome laws and human reason could not guide nor govern me:
Therefore did I practice treason--nay, unto a high degree.
In the Nightingale I sailed, and oppos’d our gracious Queen;
Law has over me prevailed; justice now steps in between

[VERSE 4]
Me and all those flights of honour which I eagerly persu’d,
Fighting under the French banner; but this day I must conclude
My sad life, with tears of sorrow, which I in abundance shed.
I can bid my griefs good morrow, but my joys are from me fled.
Had I been but true and loyal to her present Majestie,
Then I had never stood the tryal or by lawes been doom’d to dye;
But I suffer as a traytor ’gainst the Queen and Government;
Sure there cannot be a greater grief to make the heart relent.

[VERSE 5]
O, that ship which I purloined was the Nightingale by name,
In the which I once designed to have purchas’d lasting fame:
But by chance she was retaken, for indeed we could not fly.
Now of friends I am forsaken, since my death is drawing nigh.

[VERSE 6]
When I pass along the city towards Execution Dock
I shall meet with little pity, every one at me will mock:
On me they will cast reflections, which will cause much discontent;
Let this quail the fond affections of the proud and insolent.

[VERSE 7]
Farewell to the joy and pleasure which I formerly have had:
Now my griefs are out of measure, my heroick heart is sad;
All my comforts are departed, there is nothing left but grief,
Conscience wounded, broken-hearted, Lord, afford me some relief.

[VERSE 8]
Blessed Father, don’t forsake me in the bitter pangs of death.
Of thy tender mercy take me, when I shall resign my breath,
To thy glorious habitations, which are free from care and strife.
Farewel to all tribulations which attends our humane life.

[VERSE 9]
Now the sad and dismal hour of my death is drawing nigh;
Tho’ the fates may seem to lower let the loving standers-by
Grant me now their prayers and pity, which does worldly wealth excel.
Now I end my mournful ditty and you see my last farewel.

--- TITLE: The Valliant Admiral; Or, The Wonderful Success Of Sir John Leake [item: PG76941-pg76941-072]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 10593-10687
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Now of noble, hardy men of might,
  And those that with valour can heartily maintain
In the bloody field King Charles’ right,
  To make him happy on the royal throne of Spain,
      Of these I mean to sing
      While fame is on the wing,
      Glad tydings to convey,
      How we the other day
Did many laden transports take
      On the seas, with much ease,
By the right renowned Sir John Leake.

[VERSE 2]
Now the French have lost their trusty friend,
  Who used to inform them of all our State affairs;
On his letters they did still depend,
  By which we oft were drawn into fatal snares;
      He’s gone, he’s gone with shame.
      Now valiant men of fame
      Can prosper when they go,
      And daunt the daring foe,
Making their stubborn hearts to ake,
      As they find Fortune kind
To the right renowned Sir John Leake.

[VERSE 3]
Under his command the royal fleet
  With transports and tenders was for Lisbon bound.
This passage ’twas his chance to meet
  The French, which he did manfully encompass round,
      A hundred sail and more,
      As they was passing o’re
      Towards the banks of Spain,
      All loaded well with grain.
We ninety of those barks did take,
      Which was there, by the care
Of the right renowned Sir John Leake.

[VERSE 4]
When our flying streamers they beheld,
  And stout men-of-war, which was likewise rarely man’d,
They were with exceeding sorrow fill’d.
  A thousand times in vain they wish themselves on land.
      Aloud they cry’d, ‘Morblew.’
      Alas! that wou’d not do.
      The British lyon bold,
      Which scorns to be controul’d,
Caused their stubborn hearts to ake;
      Took they were by the care
Of the right renowned Sir John Leake.

[VERSE 5]
This vast fleet of barks was then convey’d
  Under the protection of three French men-of-war.
Finding they by us captives were made,
  Alas! they rung their hands and cry’d aloud, ‘Begar,
      De Britains bold are come,
      With cannon, trumpet, drum,
      To seize upon our corn,
      And make us all forlorn.’
This was the mourn which they did make;
      For they found they were bound
To submit to valliant Sir John Leake.

[VERSE 6]
Cloathes for many thousands were on board
  Those barks which was taken, and naval stores likewise:
Barley, oats, and wheat, which did afford
  Much comfort to the army of the Grand Allies;
      For well we may conclude,
      They having store of food,
      And other comforts still,
      They’ll fight with right good-will
And of the French strange havock make;
      Then let’s pray, night and day,
For the right renowned Sir John Leake.

[VERSE 7]
To fair Barcelona they have brought
  Those rich laden cargoes, worth many thousand pounds.
O the French commander little thought
  They should meet with crabid Fortune’s fatal frown:
      But so it came to pass;
      Each looking like an ass
      At their unhappy doom,
      How they did fret and foam,
While we joy and triumph make,
      Drinking still, with good-will,
To the right renowned Sir John Leake.

--- TITLE: The Sea-Fight; Or, The French Prize Taken: A Ballad [item: PG76941-pg76941-073]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 10688-10780
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Let your guns be all loose in their tackle,
Your ports be knock’d open, and every thing got
  In a right ready order for battle.
See, see that the decks and the gun-room be clear,
  And take care that your matches be lighted;
Tho’ she boldly bears down she shall find when she’s near
  That we bold Brittains scorn to be frighted.

[VERSE 2]
  Hark: she answers again with her trumpets.
She’s resolv’d to engage; to the windward she plys.
  See, her colours are out and her drum beats.
Hold fast, jolly gunner; let Monsieur begin;
  We are able, my boys, to receive him.
If he galls us at first, when we get him close in,
  We will make him submit e’er we leave him.

[VERSE 3]
  Tho’ sh’as pour’d in a broad-side upon us;
She only has rak’d us a little: no force,
  Jolly lads, have the enemy done us.
Their turn shall be next. Port easy, edge nigh her;
  Be sure bear your guns to a tittle.
God give us good luck, and now, gunner, give fire.
  Zounds! starboard; now shear off a little.

[VERSE 4]
  She’s our own; we shall certainly have her.
See, see, she bears up with a stiff gale of wind,
  That her leaks may be stopped which we gave her.
Port, port, for she shoots ahead from us apace;
  Hoist the topsail and bear briskly after;
Now, gunner, with good store of langril and case
  Let the guns be all loaded for slaughter.

[VERSE 5]
  I find we shall soon be upon her.
Now, lads, for the gold that’s aboard of the prize;
  It will all be your own when you’ve won her.
Port easy, edge tow’rds her, and run up her side.
  Now under our lee we have got her;
As stout as she seems we shall humble her pride.
  Now, gunner, give fire and have at her.

[VERSE 6]
  Our shot have done great execution;
We have shatter’d their limbs, and so mangled their joints
  That they are all in a bloody confusion.
Now board ’em, my lads; see yourlashes are clear;
  Huzza! and couragiously enter.
I hope we shall find e’ery Brittan that’s here
  Will be bold in so brave an adventure.

[VERSE 7]
  That the French are but puny bravadoes.
Wounds! cut up her hatches, and ply ’em below
  With your stinkpots and hand granadoes.
Avast: they submit and cry out for their lives.
  Good quarter we’re ready to grant ye.
If you’ll lay down your arms, and come out of your hives,
  And obey me as I shall command ye.’
  And furl ’em without opposition;
For he that crys “Quarter,” and after rebels,
  Shall be hanged without any compassion.
Now loose all your lashings and shear off the ship.
  We are clear. Go and hoist out the shallop.
Bring the pris’ners on board, but not load her too deep,
  Least the ocean should swallow ye all up.’

[VERSE 8]
  In commission, and civilly use ’em;
For tho’ they are pris’ners, as well as our foes,
  ’Tis beneath British souls to abuse ’em.
Good fortune to them the success might have gave;
  Let us therefore respectfully treat ’em;
For tho’ they are conquered they yet may be brave,
  Tho’ but cowards to those who have beat ’em,

[VERSE 9]
  See how Fortune invites you to fight on.
Stand in with our prize to the next merry port;
  Tow her in for the honour of Brittan.
Now fling up the bowl; bring an anchor of Nantz;
  Let the doctor thank God for His mercies;
Then we’ll drink the Queen’s health to our captives of France
  With a French man-of-war at our arses.’

--- TITLE: The Loss Of The Edgar [item: PG76941-pg76941-074]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 10781-10898
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

# APPARATUS: 1ST WOMAN.

[VERSE 1]
Hark! hark! alas! what fatal news is come!
It strikes a terror great thro’ Christendom.

# APPARATUS: 2ND WOMAN.

[VERSE 2]
What is it, neighbour? Pray, to me unfold.

# APPARATUS: 1ST WOMAN.

[VERSE 3]
The sadest news that ever mortal told.

# APPARATUS: 2ND WOMAN.

[VERSE 4]
Hold me not in suspence, good neighbour, pray,
But tell me quickly what you have to say:
I hope our ship and all in her is well;
I long to hear you. Pray, come quickly tell.

# APPARATUS: 1ST WOMAN.

[VERSE 5]
Here is a letter--O prepare your ears!--
From Gosport Hospital. Let floods of tears
Flow from your eyes: the gallant Edgar’s gone.
Ah! neighbour, neighbour, well may we make moan.
Your husband dear and mine, and many more,
Are blown up in the air, near thirty score,
By fatal chance of powder; by one blast
Our tender husbands now have breath’d their last.
Here comes a messenger can tell the rest;
I cannot speak, I am so much opprest.
Come, gentle messenger, relate their woe,
And tell, in brief, the truth of all you saw.

# APPARATUS: MESSENGER.

[VERSE 6]
I was at Spithead that time, and saw the sight.
I was amaz’d; my soul it did affright:
Five hundred persons blown up in the air;
Their shrieks and cries no mortal cou’d declare.
Some short-allowance mony was to be paid
That fatal day, for which on board they stay’d.
They merry were, and little did they dread
That the next moment they should all be dead.
Removing gun-powder some hours they was;
That powder wrought their dismal woes, alas!
Thro’ some neglect fire to th’ powder got,
And all these people kill’d upon the spot.
Blown in an instant up, at once indeed;
That dreadful blow makes hearts of stone to bleed.
Like roaring thunder gave a dreadful crack;
Both ship and people quickly went to wrack.
Legs, arms, heads, hands, feet, hips, bones, back and thighs
By fire and powder flew up to the skies.
Shatter’d at once in shivers up they flew,
And in an instant fled from mortal view.
Their sudden shrieks, gone just before they went,
Did eccho shrilly, and tho’ all was bent
To help them in distress, yet it was vain,
Their ship in thousand pieces rent in twain.

[VERSE 7]
# APPARATUS: 2ND WOMAN.
O wretched sight! O fatal was the day!
O my dear husband, art thou fled away?
Was this thy fatal exit from this world?
No grave! but peace-meal was thy carcass hurl’d.
O heavy message! the sad tidings spread:
O my dear husband, are you from me fled?
My soul sinks deep with grief for this my loss,
In deep despair my parting soul is toss’d.

# APPARATUS: 1ST WOMAN.

[VERSE 8]
Ah, neighbour, neighbour, you are not alone.
Here’s hundreds of us to lament and moan
Our poor unhappy husbands’ fatal fall.
Sweet Jesus Christ take pity on us all,
Children and widows send up doleful cries;
Their lamentations pierce quite thro’ the skies:
Bereft of earthly joys, with grief opprest,
’Tis God alone can ease each troubled breast.
Their earthly stay and staff from them is gone,
Wherefore they must depend on God alone.
And our good Queen will pity of them take;
Then grant them help for blessed Jesus’ sake.
One man of all that number is alive,
But is so weak he cannot long survive.
Then let us all prepared be for death,
Since none knows when we must resign our breath.
By providence the captain just before,
With’s lady too, did chance to go ashore.
Some other officers and sailors too
Are sav’d, and did that danger quite eschew.
Then let us all our sinful lives amend,
Since God such punishments to mortal send.
Let’s bear in mind this tragedy just past,
And strive to live as each day was our last.

--- TITLE: The Sailor’S Complaint [item: PG76941-pg76941-075]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 10899-10934
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come and listen to my ditty, all ye jolly hearts of gold,
Lend a brother tar your pity who was once so stout and bold;
But the arrows of God Cupid, alas! have made me rue,
Sure true love was ne’er so treated as I am by scornful Sue.

[VERSE 2]
When I landed first at Dover she appeared a goddess bright.
From foreign parts but just come over I was struck with so fair a
    sight;
On the shore pretty Susan walked near to where our frigate lay,
And altho’ so near the landing, I, alas! was cast away.

[VERSE 3]
When first I hail’d my pretty creature, the delight of land and sea,
No man ever saw a sweeter, I’d have kept her company;
I’d fain have made her my true love, for better or for worse,
But, alas! I could not compass her for to steer the marriage course.

[VERSE 4]
Once no greater joy or pleasure could have come into my mind,
Than to see the bold Defiance sailing right before the wind,
O’er the white waves as she danced, and her colours gaily flew;
But that was not half so charming as the trim of lovely Sue.

[VERSE 5]
On a rocky coast I’ve driven where the stormy winds do rise,
Where the rolling mountain billows lift a vessel to the skies;
But from land, or from the ocean, little dread I ever knew,
When compared to the dangers in the frowns of scornful Sue.
Long I wonder’d why my jewel had the heart to use me so,
Till I found by often sounding she’d another love in tow;
So farewell hard-hearted Sukie, I’ll my fortune seek at sea,
And try in a more friendly latitude, since in yours I cannot be.

--- TITLE: Fair Sally Lov’D A Bonny Sailor [item: PG76941-pg76941-076]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 10935-10988
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Fair Sally lov’d a bonny sailor,
  With tears she sent him out to roam,
Young Thomas taking leave did tell her
  He left her with his heart at home.
She view’d the seas from off the hill,
And as she turn’d her spinning-wheel,
  Sang of her bonny sailor.

[VERSE 2]
The wind grew loud and she grew paler
  To see the weathercock turn round,
When lo! she spied her bonny sailor
  Come whistling o’er the fallow ground:
With nimble haste he leap’d the stile,
Fair Sally met him with a smile,
  And hugg’d her bonny sailor.

[VERSE 3]
Fast round the waist he took his Sally,
  But first around his mouth wip’d he;
Like home-bred spark he could not dally,
  But press’d and kiss’d her with a glee.
‘Through winds, and waves, and dashing rain,’
Said he, ‘thy Tom’s return’d again,
  To bring a heart for Sally.’

[VERSE 4]
‘Welcome!’ cry’d she, ‘my constant Thomas,
  Tho’ out of sight, ne’er out of mind,
Tho’ seas our hearts have parted from us,
  Yet still my thoughts were left behind;
So much my thoughts took Tommy’s part,
That time nor absence from my heart
  Could drive my constant Thomas.’

[VERSE 5]
‘This knife the gift of lovely Sally,
  Which still I’ve kept for her dear sake,
A thousand times in am’rous folly
  Her name has carv’d upon the deck.
Again this happy pledge returns,
To shew how truly Thomas burns,
  How truly burns for Sally.’

[VERSE 6]
‘This thimble thou didst give to Sally,
  Whene’er I see I think on you.
Then why should Tom stand shilly shally
  When yonder steeple’s in our view?’
Tom, never to occasion blind,
Now took her in the coming mind,
  And went to church with Sally.

--- TITLE: How Pleasant A Sailor’S Life Passes [item: PG76941-pg76941-077]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 10989-11024
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
How pleasant a sailor’s life passes,
  Who roams o’er the watery main!
No treasure he ever amasses,
  But cheerfully spends all his gain.
We’re strangers to party and faction,
  To honour and honesty true,
And wou’d not commit a base action
  For power or profit in view.
Then why should we quarrel for riches,
  Or any such glittering toys?
A light heart and a thin pair of breeches
  Goes through the world, brave boys.

[VERSE 2]
The world is a beautiful garden
  Enrich’d with the blessings of life,
The toiler with plenty rewarding,
  Which plenty too often breeds strife.
When terrible tempests assail us,
  And mountainous billows affright,
No grandeur or wealth can avail us,
  But skilful industry steers right.
The courtier’s more subject to dangers,
  Who rules at the helm of the State,
Than we that, to politicks strangers,
  Escape the snares laid for the great.
The various blessings of nature
  In various nations we try.
No mortals than us can be greater,
  Who merrily live till we die.

--- TITLE: The Boatswain’S Whistle [item: PG76941-pg76941-078]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 11025-11076
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Life is chequer’d--toil and pleasure
Fill up all the various measure.
See the crew in flannel jerkins
Drinking, toping flip by firkins;
    And as they raise the tip
    To their happy lip,
On the deck is heard no other sound,
    But prithee Jack, Prithee Dick,
    Prithee Sam, Prithee Tom,
      Let the can go round.

[CHORUS]

Then hark to the Boatswain’s whistle, whistle!
Then hark to the Boatswain’s whistle, whistle!
      Bustle, bustle, brave boys,
    Let us sing, let us toil,
    But let’s drink all the while,
    For labour’s the price of our joys,
    For labour’s the price of our joys.

[VERSE 2]
Life is chequer’d--toil and pleasure
Fill up all the various measure:
Hark! the crew with sun-burnt faces,
Chanting Black-ey’d Susan’s graces;
    And as they raise their notes
    Thro’ their rusty throats
On the deck is heard no other sound,
    But prithee Jack, prithee Dick,
    Prithee Sam, prithee Tom,
      Let the can go round.

[VERSE 3]
Then hark, etc.
Life is chequer’d--toil and pleasure
Fill up all the various measure.
Hark! the crew their cares discarding
With huffe-cap or with chuck-farthing:
    Still in merry pin
    Let ’em lose or win,
On the deck is heard no other sound
    But prithee Jack, prithee Dick,
    Prithee Sam, prithee Tom,
      Let the can go round.

[VERSE 4]
Then hark, etc.

--- TITLE: The Downfall Of Piracy [item: PG76941-pg76941-079]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 11077-11140
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Will you hear of a bloody battle, lately fought upon the seas?
It will make your ears to rattle and your admiration cease:
Have you heard of Teach the rover, and his knavery on the main;
How of gold he was a lover, how he lov’d ill-got ten gain?

[VERSE 2]
When the Act of Grace appeared Captain Teach and all his men
Unto Carolina steered, where they us’d him kindly then;
There he marry’d to a lady, and gave her five hundred pound,
But to her he prov’d unsteady, for he soon march’d off the ground.

[VERSE 3]
And returned, as I tell you, to his robbery as before:
Burning, sinking ships of value, filling them with purple gore.
When he was at Carolina, there the Governor did send
To the Governor of Virginia, that he might assistance lend.

[VERSE 4]
Then the man-of-war’s commander, two small sloops he fitted out;
Fifty men he put on board, sir, who resolv’d to stand it out.
The lieutenant he commanded both the sloops, and you shall hear
How before he landed he suppress’d them without fear.
Valiant Maynard as he sailed soon the pirate did espy;
With his trumpet he then hailed, and to him they did reply:
‘Captain Teach is our commander.’ Maynard said, ‘He is the man
Whom I am resolv’d to hang, sir, let him do the best he can.’

[VERSE 5]
Teach replied unto Maynard, ‘You no quarter here shall see,
But be hanged on the mainyard, you and all your company.’
Maynard said, ‘I none desire of such knaves as thee and thine.’
‘None I’ll give,’ Teach then replied; ‘my boys, give me a glass of
    wine.’

[VERSE 6]
He took the glass and drank damnation unto Maynard and his crew,
To himself and generation, then the glass away he threw.
Brave Maynard was resolv’d to have him, tho’ he’d cannons nine or
    ten:
Teach a broadside quickly gave him, killing sixteen valiant men.

[VERSE 7]
Maynard boarded him and to it they fell with sword and pistol too;
They had courage, and did show it, killing of the pirate’s crew.
Teach and Maynard on the quarter fought it out most manfully;
Maynard’s sword did cut him shorter, losing his head he there did
    die.

[VERSE 8]
Every sailor fought while he, sir, power had to wield his sword,
Not a coward could you see, sir, fear was driven from aboard;
Wounded men on both sides fell, sir, ’twas a doleful sight to see,
Nothing could their courage quell, sir; O they fought couragiously.
When the bloody fight was over we’re informed by a letter writ,
Teach’s head was made a cover to the jack-staff of the ship;
Thus they sailed to Virginia, and when they the story told
How they killed the pirates many, they’d applause from young and old.

--- TITLE: Admiral Cavendish’S Distress On Board The Canterbury [item: PG76941-pg76941-080]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 11141-11216
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come all ye valiant seamen of courage stout and bold,
That value more your honour more than misers do their gold;
When we receive our orders we are obliged to go
O’er the main to proud Spain, let the wind blow high or low.

[VERSE 2]
It is the valiant Canterbury, as I to you shall tell,
Since Providence has sav’d my life in such a manner well,
And all our whole ship’s company as well as I do know,
When we were in despair in the Bay of Biscay, oh!

[VERSE 3]
The eighteenth of September from Spithead we set sail,
With the Romney in our company, blest with a pleasant gale,
And so we kept together to the Bay of Biscay, oh!
Till anon the storm came on and the wind began to blow.

[VERSE 4]
Then seeing of the storm come on the Romney bore away
And left the Canterbury, for she could no longer stay.
And when they came to Gibraltar they told the people so,
That they thought we were lost in the Bay of Biscay, oh!

[VERSE 5]
But as Providence would have it, it was not quite so bad;
But first we lost our mizen-mast, and along with it a flag,
The next we lost our main-mast, two of our guns also,
And five men were drownded then in the Bay of Biscay, oh!

[VERSE 6]
When the main-mast went away it gave a dismal stroke,
And in the larboard-quarter a great hole thro’ it broke,
Whereby the sea came roaring which made our gun-room flow,
And we rowl’d and we shoal’d in the Bay of Biscay, oh!

[VERSE 7]
Then our fore-mast went away at four o’clock at night,
Our men were in our fore-top, which put us in a fright,
Poor souls we could not save them but overboard did go:
They were lost with the mast in the Bay of Biscay, oh!

[VERSE 8]
It being dark and dismal besides a dreadful night,
One man upon the fore castle was killed out right,
With a ring upon his finger in pieces broke also,
There he lay till next day when we overboard him throw.

[VERSE 9]
We stove our barge and long boat and hove them overboard,
Because we had no tackle or else we might have lower’d.
What with the sea roaring in which made our chests to flow,
And we rowl’d and we shoal’d in the Bay of Biscay, oh!

[VERSE 10]
We lay in that condition full seven or eight days,
Till our furnace tumbled down, which put us in a maze
For we could get no victuals dress’d as I am very sure,
We did eat all raw meat till we came to Gibraltar.

[VERSE 11]
As for our admiral and captain, they are stout hearts of gold,
Besides our three lieutenants of courage stout and bold,
And all our whole ship’s company we made a gallant show,
Altho’ we were in despair in the Bay of Biscay, oh!

[VERSE 12]
The storm being quite over we got up jury-masts,
And steer’d away to Gibraltar, to which we came at last,
And when we came to Gibraltar on shore the yawl did go,
For to tell what befel in the Bay of Biscay, oh!

[VERSE 13]
Within a day or two after we came into the mole.
The people all came flocking down, our ship to behold:
They said it was the strangest thing that ever they did know,
We ne’er repine but drink wine and drown all woe.

[VERSE 14]
As for oatmeal and peas, we ne’er got any of that:
Our purser H----s put ’em in his pocket to make his guts fat.
But when we did come home, boys, we paid him off his score,
Tho’ he knew ’twas our due, it help’d to increase his store.

--- TITLE: The Pacifick Fleet: A New Ballad [item: PG76941-pg76941-081]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 11217-11301
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Good people, give ear, I’ll tell you a story,
Will tickle your ears, if you wish Britain’s glory;
For in rhyme sure the like was ne’er yet laid before ye,
                                  Which nobody can deny.

[VERSE 2]
The Spaniards of late so haughty are grown,
They pretend both our towns and our ships are their own,
And the latter they take still, ’tis very well known,
                                  Which, etc.

[VERSE 3]
Hereupon we sent word they would find it the best
To give over these pranks, for we liked not their jest,
And they gravely replied they would weigh our request,
                                  Which, etc.

[VERSE 4]
But still they went on highly pleased with the joke,
Our traders were taken, our merchants were broke,
Resolved if they could our stern wrath to provoke,
                                  Which, etc.

[VERSE 5]
So our wrath was provoked, and our rage was so great,
That a fleet was equipped, those proud Spaniards to beat,
And we sent for Dutch help in a violent heat,
                                  Which, etc.

[VERSE 6]
So the Dutch came to help us with twelve men-of-war
(For the Dutch like the Devil injustice abhor,
And they knew that the Spaniards had not played us fair),
                                  Which, etc.

[VERSE 7]
So to Spithead they went, and at Spithead have lain,
But design very soon to scower out the main,
To retrieve us our honour and humble proud Spain,
                                  Which, etc.

[VERSE 8]
But when to this purpose the fleets are to weigh,
I am sure yet no Briton will venture to say,
But this I am sure, they will sail when they may,
                                  Which, etc.

[VERSE 9]
But in the meantime, as in line they are laid,
Most wisely they are of a double use made:
To our nobles diversion, to our foes they give dread,
                                  Which, etc.

[VERSE 10]
For the gentry all round, and nobility too,
To Portsmouth ride post this Armada to view,
As the first English fleet was set out for a show,
                                  Which, etc.

[VERSE 11]
But as France will not bear Christian blood to be shed,
Notwithstanding a Wager himself’s at the head,
Fat bucks in great number have bled in their stead,
                                  Which, etc.
For the Cardinal thinks the same end we fulfil
If we bear the expense, tho’ the fleet does lie still,
For we so frighten Spain they will do what we will,
                                  Which, etc.

[VERSE 12]
So the fleet lies at anchor, the chaplains read prayers,
The ladies are learning our tarpawling airs,
And each cook for each day some new dishes prepares,
                                  Which, etc.

[VERSE 13]
The treats are of venison, of rack-punch, and jelly,
Chaire entière have the ladies as some people tell ye
And few will return without tarr in their belly,
                                  Which, etc.

[VERSE 14]
So when sail they will, they will leave us at home
A brood of young sailors for ages to come,
Who will ’list volunteers at the sound of a drum,
                                  Which, etc.

[VERSE 15]
On this score alone the expense were well made,
For sailors are wanting for war both and trade,
So the scheme for the public was very well laid,
                                  Which, etc.

--- TITLE: The Taking Of The Princissa [item: PG76941-pg76941-084]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 11447-11528
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
You brave English sailors that plow the ocean wide,
There are no better fellows in all the world beside;
Give ear unto a bloody fight to you I will display
Between a Spanish man-of-war, and the Kent, near Cator Bay.
The Lennox and the Orford was cruising thereabout,
And by a Spanish man-of-war they quickly were spy’d out.

[VERSE 2]
Under French colours she down upon us bore,
Thinking we were two merchant ships which had of riches store;
The third she thought a man-of-war our convoy for to be,
And soon she tho’t to have taken us, if not more force than she;
But whilst our English man-of-war did preparations make,
And when that she came up with her, it prov’d a sad mistake.

[VERSE 3]
She carried five hundred seamen, four hundred marines,
Most of them Irish fellows, who fought with courage keen;
Seventy-four guns she mounted, all of the largest size,
With which she thought of our ships to make a noble prize,
But she was much mistaken, as plainly doth appear,
For we have made a prize of her, and she’s arrived here.

[VERSE 4]
The Lennox, Captain Manning, receiv’d the first broadside,
Which carried away his foremast, and his bowsprit beside;
This sad unhappy accident he would no longer stay;
He was so sore disabled, was forc’d to bear away;
But for to shew his courage bold altho’ distressed sore,
He did a thundering broadside into the Spaniard pour.

[VERSE 5]
The next run up the Kent, with Captain Durell bold,
Who gave to them a good broadside, like jolly hearts of gold,
Which scar’d the Spanish captain so, he was just going to strike,
So certainly he had it done, but for an Irish tike,
Which was his first lieutenant, who with the men combin’d;
He said ‘I’ll fight the ship myself, the captain we’ll confine.

[VERSE 6]
‘Now come, my loving countrymen, with courage play your parts,
For if the English take us, we are sure of our deserts;
’Tis better manfully to fight, and here to die at sea,
For if the English take us now, we shall all hanged be.’
With that they gave a loud huzza, unto him thus did cry,
‘You shall from hence our captain be, we’ll fight until we die.’

[VERSE 7]
Like jolly hearts of gold they made their cannons roar,
Into the Kent without delay a full broad-side did pour;
Which noble Captain Durell bold did soon return again;
Full fifty of the Spanish men by that broad-side were slain.
Broad-side for broad-side, nine hours we did fight,
Till we at length did take them, our cause being just and right.

[VERSE 8]
Yard-arm and yard-arm, for hours there we lay;
With great guns, small arms, and cutlasses we made a bloody fray;
Dead men in numbers lay about, our scuppers fill’d with blood,
Which made the seas around us so like a purple flood.
Three fingers from one hand brave Captain Durell lost;
But yet he was not daunted, still he maintain’d the cause.
The third it was the Orford, who had spectator been,
But could not come to help us, nor join the bloody scene;
He hove his ship up to the wind, and brought some guns to bear,
When the desperate saw that, his heart sunk down with fear;
He was so sore disabled, and was so flutter’d then,
To which he had already lost above five hundred men.

[VERSE 9]
But then this Irish desperate did also order then
Two guns to point down in the hold, to sink both ship and men.
O! this unhappy order fill’d his men with horrid dread,
When instantly a cannon-ball came and took off his head.
They made no more resistance, but down their colours took,
And to the Orford now come up, immediately she struck.

[VERSE 10]
So now these Irish desperates, their case it must look sad;
To fight against King and country, their cause was very bad.
Here’s health to all our admirals, and the captains also,
Likewise to every brave seaman aboard with them that go.
And may the bowl successful flow to all our British fleet,
Wishing they may Jack Spaniard drub, where’er with them they meet.

--- TITLE: English Courage Display’D, Or Brave News From Admiral Vernon [item: PG76941-pg76941-085]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 11529-11598
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come loyal Britons all rejoyce with joyful acclamations,
And join with one united voice upon this just occasion;
To Admiral Vernon drink a health, likewise to each brave fellow
Who with that noble admiral was at the taking of Porto Bello.

[VERSE 2]
From Jamaica he did sail with Commodore Brown to attend him,
Against the Spaniards to prevail, for which we must commend him,
At Porto Bello he arriv’d where each brave gallant fellow
With Admiral Vernon bravely fought, at the taking Porto Bello.

[VERSE 3]
Two men-of-war of twenty guns, likewise five Guarda Costa’s
They in the harbour quickly took, to surrender they were forc’d, sir;
Then the town he summons’d strait, to surrender at his will O,
Which they refusing he did bumbard the town of Porto Bello.

[VERSE 4]
He did bumbard it above two days, and they again return’d it;
The bombs and morters loud did play, he vow’d that he would burn it:
Which when they came to understand, and that he was so brave a
    fellow
They did surrender out of hand, the town of Porto Bello.

[VERSE 5]
Then with his men he went on shore who strait began to plunder,
’Tis as they serv’d our ships before, and therefore is no wonder.
With plenty of rum and good strong wines, our men did soon get
    mellow
Then swore that never a house should stand in the town of Porto
    Bello.
The governor to the admiral sent and to him made an offer
Of thirty thousand pieces of eight the houses to save did proffer.
Which the admiral did accept with a right and free goodwill O,
And therefore let the houses stand in the town of Porto Bello.

[VERSE 6]
Their Iron Castle he destroy’d, and all their guns he seized.
The Spaniards ne’er was more anoy’d; he did just what he pleased.
The South Sea snow he did release, and many a stout English fellow
Whom they had rob’d upon the seas, and carried into Porto Bello.

[VERSE 7]
All their brass guns he took away, the iron ones he nailed
And then threw them into the sea, before from thence he sailed,
Many a jolly sailor’s pouch was cram’d with white and yellow,
For they from plunder could not be kept in the town of Porto Bello.

[VERSE 8]
Besides, brave Vernon freely gave amongst his men as follows,
Who bravely did themselves behave, full thirty thousand dollars,
This must their courage animate; each tar is a rich fellow,
And this is good encouragement for the taking Porto Bello.

[VERSE 9]
When he had stayed there nineteen days, with just resentment fir’d,
Their forts demolished and castles rase’d he from them then retired,
But first he to Panama sent for many a gallant fellow,
Who in prison lay confin’d to be brought to Porto Bello.

[VERSE 10]
While trumpets they did loudly sound and colours were displaying,
The prizes he with him brought away while sailors were huzzaing.
And when they to Jamaica come, a glorious tale to tell O
Of the noble action they had done in taking of Porto Bello.

[VERSE 11]
To Admiral Vernon toss off a glass, may heaven protect and defend
    him,
And when he has the Spaniard thump’d, may a safe return attend him
To Comodore Brown toss another down, and to each gallant fellow
Who did so bravely play their parts at the taking of Porto Bello.

--- TITLE: Vernon’S Glory: Or, The Spaniards’ Defeat [item: PG76941-pg76941-087]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 11705-11824
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Once more, brave boys, let us proclaim
Brave noble Admiral Vernon’s fame,
With Sir Chaloner Ogle too:
They now have made the Spaniards rue;
For Carthageen they now have ta’en,
And laid it level with the ground;
Seven castles so brave their town could not save,
For Vernon and Ogle have beat them down.

[VERSE 2]
Last March we did from Jamaica sail
With a fair and gentle gale;
Vice-Admiral Vernon of the Blue,
Sir Chaloner Ogle, Rear-Admiral too,
With Lestock Commodore, we made our cannons roar,
And two-and-twenty frigates besides:
Thirty ships of the line, a sight very fine,
Before Carthageen at anchor to ride.

[VERSE 3]
Bocachica Castle first we took,
Which made the Spaniards blue to look;
That being of the largest force,
The other six did fall of course:
With our cannons and bombs we dismounted their guns,
And our colours did on their Castles raise:
Then toss off a glass, and about let it pass,
To Admiral Vernon’s and Ogle’s praise.
For twelve hours’ space we bombarded the town,
Before we brought their proud spirits down;
We fir’d so smart that they thought we were mad,
At length to surrender they were glad.
We did so cannonade, and such breaches we made,
And many of their houses set in a flame;
They did submit to fate, and the town surrendered
To Admiral Vernon, the scourge of Spain.

[VERSE 4]
The Shrewsbury she did suffer most,
And many of her sailors were lost;
Her cable broke, on the Castles she drove,
And there expected she would have stove;
But kind Providence stood in her defence:
Much shatter’d at last she clear’d her way.
Her jolly sailors bold, those noble hearts of gold,
All the time shew’d the Spaniards gallant play.

[VERSE 5]
Don Blass with six ships in the harbour lay,
And soon we shew’d him British play;
We made that proud and hectoring Don
Coward-like from his ship to run;
Tho’ his ship he forsook, two captains we took
And unto England brought them home;
Let th’ insulting foe and proud Don know
Vernon can conquer wherever he comes.

[VERSE 6]
Six galleons did there remain,
Which by our fleet were burnt or ta’en:
And tho’ their treasure was on shore
Yet we found a sufficient store;
For plunder, my boys, did crown our joys
After that strong place we had won:
We did revel and roar and booze it on shore,
And forgot all the dangers we had run.

[VERSE 7]
In the king’s store-house we found
The value of several thousand pounds,
Which with great joy we brought away,
And did on board our ships convey:
Our success was crown’d with plunder we found,
While the cowardly Spaniards from us fled;
So great was their fear, they would not us come near,
For Vernon had fill’d them all with dread.

[VERSE 8]
When we had all their treasure seiz’d,
And freely plunder’d where we pleas’d,
And none but rubbish did remain,
Their store-houses we set on flames:
Thus we burnt them down quite unto the ground:
A heap of ashes for to view;
Let the cowards know, tho’ they did insult us so,
What noble Admiral Vernon can do.

[VERSE 9]
Our jolly tars, brave, noble hearts,
And the brave marines did play their parts;
The officers their orders gave,
Which the men performed as brave.
They never did flinch, nor gave back an inch,
But sweet revenge was all their cry:
They scorn’d for to run from the mouth of a gun,
But with Vernon and Ogle would conquer or die.

[VERSE 10]
For the proud Queen of Spain we care not a fart!
For Carthageen she may break her heart;
Of Don Blass, that cowardly tool,
Brave Vernon did make an April fool:
For ’twas upon that day we made him run away,
Unto our noble admiral’s fame:
Then fill a brimming glass, and round let it pass,
To Admiral Vernon and Ogle’s name.

[VERSE 11]
Come, brave boys, a health begin,
And fill your glasses to the brim;
A health to Admiral Vernon brave;
To Sir Chaloner Ogle another we’ll have;
To each jolly tar and marine that was there,
Whose courage then was bravely seen;
To Lestock, Commodore, and many thousands more,
Who assisted at taking of Carthageen.

--- TITLE: The Saphirah [Sic] In Triumph: Or, British Valor Display’D [item: PG76941-pg76941-088]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 11825-11905
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come you jovial British fellows, listen, pray, to what I write,
Honour jolly English sailors, for their nation they do fight;
It was with courage most undaunted from Port Rhode the Sapphire
    sail’d,
By mishap our cable parted, but we soon the Spaniards quell’d.

[VERSE 2]
A full intent to batter Vigo, our full force was only forty guns,
Which to them does plainly show, sir, what courage in the English
    runs;
With spreading sails we plough’d the ocean, the seas indeed ran
    mountains high,
Not fearing death to gain promotion, with proud Spain our valour try.

[VERSE 3]
All along their coast we sailed, the wind it blowed very hard;
Our main-top-sail yard it failed, but we it did not regard.
We did soon their harbour enter, they prepared for us were,
And we boldly in did venture without any dread or fear.
As soon as ever we came nigh them they did fire at us first;
We not wanting to pass by them immediately our anchor cast.
And up went our bloody pennant and defy’d their cannon-ball,
We made to run both landlord and tenant, and behind to leave their
    all.

[VERSE 4]
No quarters from them we requir’d, they did see us boldly bent;
Kill or be kill’d we designed, that indeed was our intent.
Then our cannon roar’d like thunder, sweeter musick who could hear?
They did make our foes to wonder, fill’d their hearts with dread
    and fear.

[VERSE 5]
Their privateers at anchor lying we did sink before their face;
Women with their children crying from the town did run a-pace.
By us their prison was confounded: to some it proved a happy day;
Such as were not kill’d or wounded took to their heels and run away.

[VERSE 6]
Their nunnery did feel our fury, their blind zeal could not them
    save;
Some in confusion and great hurry were sent by us to their grave.
About their ears their houses tumbled, which no doubt did grieve
    them sore;
Was ever haughty Spain so humbled by one small ship as now before?

[VERSE 7]
Two thousand shot and more we fir’d at their churches, forts, and
    town,
It made us laugh till we were tir’d to see their houses tumble down:
Seventeen hundred and forty-four, sir, January the fifteenth day,
That we made the Spaniards rue, sir, our most noble British play.

[VERSE 8]
We had in this bold action one man killed, and no more;
Which I think was enough to vex ’em, they having many in their gore.
Had the day but longer lasted, and our ship not damnify’d,
We’d made them surrender, we protested, or would all have surely
    dy’d.

[VERSE 9]
We then soon for Lisbon sailed, where we got wine our hearts to
    cheer.
At Vigo widows their fates bewailed, and curst the time that we
    came there.
I wish that all our brave commanders, who sail the seas for
    Britain’s right,
May like bold Holmes prove Alexanders, not fearing death when they
    do fight.

[VERSE 10]
May he meet with a just treatment from our nation for the same,
For so bold and brave defeatment none but cowards can him blame.
Little Laughton, our third lieutenant, did at that time great
    valour show;
King and country’s bold defendant, beloved by all that does him
    know.

[VERSE 11]
Bring us wine, let it be sherry, fill the glass up to the brink;
Drown all sorrows and be merry; to our noble captain drink.
Pray God send our royal master George the Second long to reign,
For to meet with no disaster, but the victory always gain.

--- TITLE: Admiral Matthews’ Engagement Against The Combined Fleets Of France And Spain [item: PG76941-pg76941-089]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 11906-11975
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Brave Admiral Matthews has been on the main,
With a true British heart, against France and Spain;
Resolving to fight for old England once more,
And make them knock under before he gives o’er;
For there never was such a bold fleet, as they say,
Sent out by Old England this many a day.

[VERSE 2]
He had not long been on the sea, it is true,
Before that in sight there appear’d in his view
Twenty-eight sail of the French and proud Spain,
Who swiftly were sailing along the salt main.
Then he cry’d, ‘My brave boys, look, see how they ride!
I hope in small time we shall soon cool their pride.’

[VERSE 3]
We hoisted our sails, and away then we went,
With our guns all ready, and hearts likewise bent,
Until that we come to the view of them all;
Then strait our brave admiral unto us did call,
At the word of command to make ready with speed,
‘For I think the proud Dons will fight us indeed.’

[VERSE 4]
But the wind prov’d contrary, we could not pursue,
Altho’ that we had them so full in our view;
And for to deceive us they did lay in wait,
Thinking we should follow them up to the Straits:
Though our good God was pleas’d to alter the wind,
Yet fortune unto us it proved unkind.

[VERSE 5]
There is an old proverb I’ve lately thought on,
‘When you think of a friend you’re sure to find none’;
For when that I thought to see Lestock come by,
He was five miles a distance, and would not come nigh;
But for all that misfortune, we never could start,
We pursued after them with a true British heart.

[VERSE 6]
A mile’s distance next day, they at us did fire,
But in half an hour we to them drew nigher,
Until that we came within pistol-shot,
Then we did let fly; and why should we not?
As we sent ’em one broadside, another did come,
Which made our cannons to play, bomb! bomb!

[VERSE 7]
Our admiral then took his glass in his hand,
To espy what he could, as you shall understand;
A double shot came unto him so nigh,
That it took off the place where his arm did lye.
But for that misfortune, and all that foul play,
He held ’em six hours in hot battle that day.

[VERSE 8]
The night being come, they straightway gave o’er,
And went off with their cripples; we see ’em no more.
But now that the war is proclaim’d against France,
When we see them again we’ll make ’em to prance;
And if ever they into our presence do come,
We’ll make our cannons play ‘Britons, strike home.’

[VERSE 9]
Then straightway we left them in grief to complain,
Whilst we are carousing along the salt main.
Pray God bless our fleet, and his Majesty too,
And grant them success wherever they go.
Concluding as this, and my song to end,
In Matthews’ brave ship these verses were penn’d.

--- TITLE: A New Song In Praise Of Brave Captain Hornsby [item: PG76941-pg76941-090]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 11976-12035
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come all you brave sailors that plough on the main,
And hear of the brave Captain Hornsby by name;
How bravely he acted and play’d his own part,
That he made the proud Frenchmen to quake in their hearts.

[VERSE 2]
The French captain came up, and said, ‘You English dog, strike.’
‘Not so,’ said brave Hornsby, ‘I first chuse to fight,
To strike to a Frenchman I hold it so base,
That I rather chuse to die in this place.’

[VERSE 3]
The Frenchmen then boarded his vessel straightway,
And brave Captain Hornsby did shew them fine play;
He fought them five hours, five hours or more,
’Till thirty-six Frenchmen lay dead in their gore.

[VERSE 4]
All the men that he had on his ship were but eight,
And yet to a Frenchman he scorn’d for to strike;
Tho’ he had but one man for the Frenchman’s ten,
He both burnt his vessel and drown’d all his men.

[VERSE 5]
Come, all ye brave sailors that plough on the main,
Remember the brave Captain Hornsby, by name;
And if that a Frenchman commands you to strike,
Give answer like Hornsby, you first chuse to fight.

[VERSE 6]
If you take a good courage, and have a strong faith,
Trust in your Creator, he’ll ne’er you forsake;
If you have but one man for the Frenchman’s ten,
You may both sink his vessel and drown all his men.

[VERSE 7]
Now brave Captain Hornsby, as I have been told,
Has got as a present a medal of gold;
Besides a fine chain of gold so bright,
Because the proud French he so bravely did fight.

[VERSE 8]
Likewise every man in his ship, as we hear,
Has had five pounds paid him down for his share;
The boys forty shillings a piece they have got
For standing so bravely against the French shot.

[VERSE 9]
Now all you brave heroes that heareth this song,
I beg you excuse if any, thing be wrong;
For I am no poet, nor scholar I swear,
But I love loyal subjects I vow and declare.
So let’s all in the praise of Hornsby now sing,
For whom bonfires did blaze, and bells they did ring;
To hear of this battle so gallantly got,
And he and his men so preserved from the shot.

[VERSE 10]
And now to conclude of brave Hornsby so bold,
I wish he was master of a million of gold;
For fighting so boldly against the proud French,
And laying them low in a watery trench.
Tho’ he had but one man to the Frenchman’s ten,
Yet he sunk both his vessel, and drown’d all his men.

--- TITLE: Captain Cobb’S Bravery [item: PG76941-pg76941-091]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 12036-12093
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Captain Cobb in Lynn doth dwell, a man of worthy fame,
He went on board the bold Bacchus, a ship of lovely fame, fal
    lal lal, etc.

[VERSE 2]
From Lynn to Port there we were bound, and for to load with wine;
And as we were returning home, a privateer espyed.

[VERSE 3]
Our master bold said, ‘Every man stand true unto his gun;
And let us give them a full broadside, and see if we can them shun.’

[VERSE 4]
No sooner we had fired at them, but the Spaniards returned the same;
We tacked our ship about again, and gave them athump for their
    pain.

[VERSE 5]
The second broadside the Spaniard fired they wounded our captain
    sore,
‘For quarters, quarters,’ our captain cried; ‘No, damn it,’ the
    boatswain swore,

[VERSE 6]
‘Go you down into your cabin, and leave all things to me;
I’ll warrant I’ll make them all stand true, and will gain the
    victory.’

[VERSE 7]
We had no more than fourteen men, and two boys which made sixteen;
We fought with a hundred and twenty-four men, and cleared our way
    of them.

[VERSE 8]
There were thirty of them boarded us, a dreadful sight to see,
I could not get my gun to fire, and sore it did grieve me.

[VERSE 9]
A blunderbuss I took in hand, and did them sweetly bang;
Some we drove into the sea, and some on the deck lay slain.

[VERSE 10]
And the rest of them that was left alive, their arms we took from
    them;
And stowed them close down in their hold, till to England we came.

[VERSE 11]
We began at four in the afternoon, and fought while eight at night;
And before we had fired at her larboard side on her we ’spyed a
    light.

[VERSE 12]
No sooner had we fired at her, no more of her we could see,
God knows whether we sunk her, or whether she run away.
The Heavens above alone did us love, o’er our enemies to prevail;
So we set sail and away we came, with a fine and pleasant gale.

[VERSE 13]
When to old England we come, and our merchants do hear of the same,
I hope they will some kindness shew, and reward us for our pains.

[VERSE 14]
If every Englishman like us would fight upon the sea,
They need not fear to sail the seas, nor to face the enemy.

--- TITLE: The Princess Royal’S Escape From The Goodwin Sands [item: PG76941-pg76941-092]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 12094-12146
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come all you jolly sailors that to the seas are bent,
I’ll tell you of a story that shall make your hearts relent,
It’s of the Princess Royal, that gallant ship of fame,
Commanded by bold Captain Lee by name.

[VERSE 2]
On the seventh of February from the Nore we did sail,
Our topsails a flying with a fine and pleasant gale,
But no further then the Gun-fleet that night could we go
Where we lost our pinnace and three men in her also.
So then for the Gun-fleet we quickly did sail,
All for the Downs with a fine and pleasant gale,
And when we came down there our orders were so,
No further then the Downs our ship was to go,

[VERSE 3]
And there for to wait to join our fleet,
All with Sir John Norris the French fleet to meet.
On the seventh day our fleet they came in,
Expecting at Dungeness the French fleet to trim.

[VERSE 4]
So then from the Downs we quickly did sail,
All for Dungeness the French to prevail,
But then off Folkstone we was forc’d to bring to,
Where the French fleet did appear in our view.

[VERSE 5]
Our captain on board the admiral he went,
To let him know our losses it was our full intent,
The admiral he order’d us to Spithead with speed,
But our thiler being broke we turn’d back again.

[VERSE 6]
Four anchors we lost which grieved us full sore,
To think we had but one anchor and cable more,
So we stear’d for the Downs and when we came there
We let go our last anchor in despair.

[VERSE 7]
Right on the Goodwin Sands O the wind it did blow,
Which fill’d our whole ship’s company all full of woe.
But thanks be to God our cable it did hold,
Which saved the lives of so many sailors bold.

[VERSE 8]
So now my lads since the danger it is o’er,
How merry we will be boys if e’er we get on shore,
With full flowing bowls the bumpers shall go round
With our lasses upon our knees our sorrows to drown.

[VERSE 9]
So now to conclude and end my song,
It was a brisk young sailor unto the ship belong’d
It was a brisk young sailor that these lines did make,
And o’er a can of flip his heart would never ake.

--- TITLE: The Loss Of The Victory Man-Of-War [item: PG76941-pg76941-093]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 12147-12202
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Good people all, pray give attention, to this fatal tragedy,
Which I am bound to mention of the gallant Victory:
Fourteen hundred souls did perish, and are to the bottom gone,
Oh! the dismal grief and horror of their widows left alone.

[VERSE 2]
When we first from Spithead sailed, convoy unto Lisbon bound,
They with good flip and punch regaled a brave new ship both right
    and sound:
A hundred and ten guns she mounted, all of brass so smart and clean,
The best ship in the Navy counted, but alas! no more is seen.

[VERSE 3]
But the voyage proved fatal, as by the sequel we shall find,
For as she was home returning, she was off Scilly left behind
In a dreadful storm of lightning, and of hail and thunder too,
And has never since been heard of, the fatherless have cause to rue,

[VERSE 4]
From Alderney we’ve information that they heard that stormy night,
At least ninety guns to fire which did them something affright:
But as the more the storm increased it gave them more room to guess
That some ship upon the ocean, was in sad and deep distress.
We saw floating some days after some spare yards were drove on shore,
On which was the name Victory, this gave us suspicion more:
That the noble ship was stranded on the Gaskets was our fear,
Long we waited with impatience, but no news of them could hear.

[VERSE 5]
The brave gallant Admiral Balchen with fourteen hundred men beside,
If she’s lost, went to the bottom, and all at once together died:
Oh! the dismal grief and horror if one had been there to see,
How they all were struck with horror when sunk down the Victory.

[VERSE 6]
O! the sad and dismal story, I’m griev’d when I the same relate,
So many blasted in their glory and at once shared the same fate:
Some thinking on their wives and children, and some on their
    parents dear,
Sunk to the bottom in a moment, and no time to say a prayer.

[VERSE 7]
O Victory! thou wast unlucky, but once before was out at sea,
In the night run foul of the Lion, and her carved work took away:
Now thou art gone to the bottom with a jovial company,
An admiral, marines and sailors, most unhappy Victory!

[VERSE 8]
Oh! the grief of mournful widows, and their children fatherless,
And the grief of tender parents, is more than what I can express:
Some lamenting for their sweethearts overwhelm’d with grief we see,
Each one laments his dear relation, Oh! the fatal Victory!
Children crying for their fathers, widows weeping in distress,
God will surely be their comfort, and protect the fatherless.
He’ll be a husband to the widow that loves honest industry,
And does give them His protection; farewell fatal Victory!

--- TITLE: Disconsolate Judy’S Lamentation For The Absence Of Her True Love Johnny, On Board The Victory, With Admiral Balchen, Now Missing [item: PG76941-pg76941-094]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 12203-12251
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come pity me, young maidens all,
Who am brought into wretched thrall,
My love was prest away to sea,
And is on board the Victory.

[VERSE 2]
When of him I did take my leave,
He said, ‘Dear Judy, do not grieve;
Altho’ I absent from you be,
Stout is our ship, the Victory.

[VERSE 3]
‘Brave Balchen is a gallant man,
And will conduct us safe to land;
Then my dear Judy I shall see,
When safe returns the Victory.’

[VERSE 4]
Ah! John, indeed my heart did fail,
When you to Lisbon was to sail,
For dangers they are great at sea,
Oh! now where is the Victory.

[VERSE 5]
O John, my lovely sailor dear,
My heart is sore opprest with fear;
A letter, true love, send to me,
From on board the Victory.

[VERSE 6]
No cruel balls has hurt my dear,
No fatal rocks you have come near,
Nor taken by an enemy,
You nor the gallant Victory.

[VERSE 7]
Nine hundred men on board you have,
A jolly crew both stout and brave
As ever did go out to sea,
God send safe home the Victory.

[VERSE 8]
Dear Johnny, I at Portsmouth wait,
And watch for you early and late,
Wishing each moment for to see
Come sailing in the Victory.

--- TITLE: England’S Glory; Or The French King Stripped [item: PG76941-pg76941-095]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 12252-12299
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come all you jolly seamen, that’s willing to enter
On board of the Duke, your lives for to venture,
On board of the Duke, she’s called by name,
She cruizes the seas for old England’s fame.
                                        Fal, etc.

[VERSE 2]
The fourth day of May from the Downs we set sail,
O, we were blest with a very fine gale:
And with the Prince Frederick being our Commodore,
We steered away, boys, for the Canary shore.
                                        Fal, etc.

[VERSE 3]
The tenth day of July, it being very clear,
We espy’d three ships belonging to Mounsieur;
O, these three ships were coming from Peru,
With gold and silver, boys, all in our view.
                                        Fal, etc.

[VERSE 4]
A broadside from these French dogs we did receive,
But quickly two for one O we did them give:
But then at length they would no longer fight,
‘Our ships are a sinking’ for quarter they cry’d.
                                        Fal, etc.

[VERSE 5]
We hoisted out our pinnace, went to them straitway,
We boarded two of their ships the very same day;
We brought all the prisoners on board our own ship,
Our hearts then within us began for to leap.
                                        Fal, etc.
Then we went to Kingsale, being the nearest place,
That we durst go to for to show our face:
Where we had good wine and punch in gollore,
And rum and brandy, boys, all in good store.
                                        Fal, etc.

--- TITLE: The Lucky Sailor; Or The Sailor’S Invitation To Go With Admiral Anson [item: PG76941-pg76941-096]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 12300-12363
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come jolly sailors, join with me,
Come jolly sailors, join with me,
To fight with Anson for renown,
That we the French pride may pull down!
We’ll take ’em all upon the seas;
We’ll take ’em all upon the seas;
We’ll make ’em strike where’er we meet,
Or serve ’em all as we’ve done these.

[VERSE 2]
My boys, you heard what we have done, (bis)
Ten sail of men-of-war we took,
And made the merchant-men to run;
Our admiral he ordered then, (bis)
Three men-of-war to chase ’em all,
To sink and take whate’er they can.

[VERSE 3]
The Centurion first led the van, (bis)
And held ’em till we came up;
Then we their hides did sorely bang,
Our broadsides we on them did pour, (bis)
We gave the French a sower drench,
And soon their topsails made them lower.

[VERSE 4]
And when they saw our fleet come up, (bis)
They for quarters call’d without delay,
And their colours they that moment struck
O! how we did rejoice and sing, (bis)
To see such prizes we had took,
For ourselves and for George our King.

[VERSE 5]
O! now, my boys, I’m come on shore, (bis)
I’ll make you drink before we part;
Such luck I never had before.
Here is a health to those brave men, (bis)
That did command this noble fleet,
Bold Anson and brave Warren.

[VERSE 6]
My boys our prizes is arrived, (bis)
Which when the people they did see,
It did their very hearts revive.
With joy and mirth we spent the night, (bis)
In drinking loyal healths all round,
It was such a welcome sight.

[VERSE 7]
Our ships are all a fitting up, (bis)
Again with Anson we will go,
I wish we may have but good luck.
My boy, I’d have you to go too, (bis)
For Anson is a lucky man,
Where’er he comes he makes ’em rue.

[VERSE 8]
This is the second time you’ve seen (bis)
The waggon loads of money come,
And all taken by brave Anson.
Come now, my boys, drink off a glass; (bis)
Let’s not forget now we’re come home,
Each bold sailor’s pretty lass.

--- TITLE: Tit For Tat: A Sea Kick For A Land Cuff [item: PG76941-pg76941-097]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 12364-12454
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Ring, ring out our bells! and to Calais from Dover
Let our cannons loud roar carry France the news over,
That the balance of land and sea war we’ve brought home,
And our prizes, at Portsmouth, pay their Bergen-opzoom.
So Huzzah! to King George, boys; long, long may he reign,
By the right of old England, long lord of the main!
    So Huzzah! to King George, etc.

[VERSE 2]
Now hark! and you’ll hear (and with truth ’twill be told)
How the seas have been swept by his true hearts of gold:
In the month of October, to West Indies bound,
A fleet so becrowded with numbers we found,
Tho’ our ken could not count ’em, our first chasing gun
Observ’d ’em less forward to fight than to run.
    Tho’ our ken could not count ’em, etc.

[VERSE 3]
All, all hands aloft, and away ’fore the wind,
Full sail sped their merchants, from convoys behind;
Yet, to do their tall ships the true honour we owe ’em,
Tho’ to beat was above ’em, to fly was below ’em.
But their cargoes, in danger, had no time to talk;
So like pigeons they flew from our bold British Hawk.
    But their cargoes, in danger, etc.

[VERSE 4]
Now broadsides to broadsides, smash! thro’ and thro’ boring,
Made the sea seem a forest of lions all roaring!
But the Severn’s bruised ribs felt our shot fly so sore,
That her loud fifty mouths never spoke a word more.
So silenc’d we left her, without more concern,
To be catch’d, as we saw, by our frigates astern.
    So silenc’d we left her, etc.

[VERSE 5]
Of their Trident our Devonshire came alongside,
And souse! in her guts, such a dose did she hide,
That the rummaging pills almost work’d her to death,
For she soon, like the Severn, lay gasping for breath.
Then bounce! came their Terrible--foul on a Tartar;
But she too sung small, till she cry’d out for quarter.
    Then bounce! came their Terrible, etc.

[VERSE 6]
Now shatter’d and batter’d (Morbleu! such a sight!)
Their Thunder knock’d under, and stole off by night;
When six of their squadron, that scarcely could creep,
We lugg’d and tugg’d home, in our harbours to sleep.
And so large were their hulks, tho’ we ply’d ’em with rubbing,
To be sure their thick hides took a good deal of drubbing.
    And so large were their hulks, etc.

[VERSE 7]
And now, the next year, when the prizes we’ve made
By our own hands are mann’d out, we’ll drive a French trade;
While the sea is our market, for squadrons we’ll barter,
And give for first rates only bullets and quarter!
So, Huzzah! to King George, boys; long, long may he reign,
By the right of old England, long lord of the main.
    So, Huzzah! etc.

[VERSE 8]
While our salt water walls so begird us about,
And our cruisers, and bruisers, keep good looking out,
What force need old England to fear can offend her,
From France, or from Spain, or a Popish Pretender?
So, Huzzah! to King George, boys; long, long may he reign,
By the right of old England, long lord of the main.
    So Huzzah! etc.

--- TITLE: A New Song On Admiral Knowls Taking Port Louis [item: PG76941-pg76941-098]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 12455-12498
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Let every loyal Briton sing
Prosperity to George our King;
He that refuses let him swing,
As many has done before him;
But I shall raise my chearfull voice,
Let Englishmen with me rejoice,
For valiant Knowls, huzza! brave boys,
The sailor does admire.

[VERSE 2]
Hispaniola and Louis Port
Afforded Englishmen brave sport.
Brave news, brave news for the British Court,
Those places both are taken;
We’ve taken Pondicherry too.
Another scene appears in view:
Jago de Cuba soon must rue,
If I am not mistaken.

[VERSE 3]
It is such valiant acts as these
That makes Mounsieur cry out for peace:
Morblue hostilities pray cease
And I’ll return all Flanders!
Let all true Britons fill their bowls,
A health to that hero Admiral Knowls,
A health to our Brittish sailors bold
That fought with this brave comander.

[VERSE 4]
Another glass to the sailors brave
That with him such proofs of valour gave;
Confusion to the rebel slave
That does refuse to drink it!
Let all true Britons fill their bowls:
A health to hero Admiral Knowls,
A health to our British sailors bold
That fought with this brave commander.

--- TITLE: A New Song [item: PG76941-pg76941-099]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 12499-12537
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
All ye noble British spirits that midst dangers glory sought,
Let it lessen not your merit that a woman bravely fought:
Cupid slily first inroll’d me, Pallas next her force did bring,
Press’d my heart to venture boldly for my love and for my King.

[VERSE 2]
Sailorlike, to fear a stranger, straight I ventured on the main,
Facing death and every danger, love and glory to obtain;
Tell me, you who hear my story, what could more my courage move?--
George’s name inspired with glory, William was the man I lov’d.

[VERSE 3]
When from William Susan parted she but wept and shook her hand;
I, more bold (tho’ tender-hearted), left my friends and native land;
Bravely by his side, maintaining British rights, I shed my blood,
Still to him unknown remaining, watch’d to serve and do him good.

[VERSE 4]
In the midst of blood and slaughter, bravely fighting for my King,
Facing death from every quarter, fame and conquest home to bring;
Sure you’ll own ’tis more than common, and the world proclaim it too,
Never yet did any woman more for love and glory do.

--- TITLE: The Lighterman’S Prentice Prest And Sent To Sea [item: PG76941-pg76941-100]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 12538-12624
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
A prentice I was at Wapping-new-stairs,
And a smart young lad was I;
But that old blackguard old W----d,
He inform’d, and had forty shillings for me.
It was on the last day of February,
In the year of fifty-five:
He had me taken out of bed;
When my friends heard it, lord! how they cry’d.
My mother and my cousin both
They on board of the tender came with speed,
And thro’ the grates to them I talk’d,
It was enough to make any heart to bleed.
My mother and my cousin both,
They in a boat did go ashore.
Then from the Tower we set sail,
For the Yarmouth rideing at the Nore.
In happen’d on a Sunday morning
We arrived at the Nore;
The commodore fir’d his signal gun
For the women all to go ashore.
And when unto the ship I went,
They put me in a great surprize;
There I heard some swearing and some cursing,
And some damning their precious eyes,
To think that the commodore fir’d his signal
For all their wives to go ashore;
There was some crying and some sniffling,
Crying ‘My dear, I shall see you no more.’
Then from the Nore we did set sail,
And unto Spithead we was bound.
It was a pretty sight to see
The lasses lin’d round Portsmouth town.
Then from the Yarmouth I was sent
On board of Captain, so-call’d by name;
There I fell sick on board of her,
And to Gosport hospital sent for the same.
There for three long months I stay’d,
And very bad I was indeed;
But I got well and away I went
On board of the Captain with speed.
I had not been on board her long
Before the fleet they all did sail,
From Spithead to St. Helens, boys,
With a fine and pleasant gale.
And when to St. Helens, boys, we came,
The wind at west was very high;
Sir Edward Hawke hove out his signal,
For to come to anchor that very night.
Sir Edward he hove out another signal,
For the captain’s boat to come with speed,
It was for to turn over fifty hands,
On board of the Ipswich indeed.
And when alongside of the Ipswich we came,
I boldly in her jump’d in:
And a-cruizing the Channel I went in her,
And the French dogs we did sweetly trim.
We’d not been out above six weeks
Before the news to us was brought:
Then to take, sink, burn, and destroy
All the French ships we came athwart.
It happen’d on a Sunday morning,
As we was on our starboard tack,
Between the hours of nine and ten,
Three sail of Frenchmen we did take.
We fir’d a shot and hoisted our colours,
Then to let them see what we was;
As soon as they came along side us
They saw we was English boys,
Then straitway they haul’d down their colours,
And unto us they did strike;
And they know’d that they must sink,
If they had offer’d for to fight.
We took five more, which made us eight,
And away to Spithead, boys, we went.
And now, my lads, we’re come to an harbour,
We can go to rest with great content.
So all young men that row in the lighters
Keep yourselves free from a press-gang,
And when ever you come athwart old W----d
For my sake give him a hearty damn.

--- TITLE: Britain’S Resolution To Fight The French [item: PG76941-pg76941-101]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 12625-12695
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

# APPARATUS: (? 1756)

[VERSE 1]
Come join with me, you Britons bold,
Ne’er let your country be sold;
We’ll let the French to understand,
We’ll fight them both by sea or land,
With hearts of steel and sword in hand,
                  Like Britons bold.

[VERSE 2]
Brave Prince George shall command
Our English army, boys, by land;
And when we meet our enemy,
We’ll let them know we’ll fight or die,
And quickly make them for to fly
                  From Britons bold.

[VERSE 3]
Brave Anson and Hawke, brave Mostyn and West,
They are all admirals of the best;
And brave Boscawen we’ll not pass by,
For he will either fight or dy,
And from the French he’ll never fly,
                  He is a Briton bold.

[VERSE 4]
In brave Plymouth Harbour near the main,
There’s a hundred sail of French ships we’ve ta’en;
Already, boys, they have a drench,
We have many thousands of the French,
Confin’d in close imprisonment,
                  By Britons bold.

[VERSE 5]
Our Parliament they do agree
That all these ships shall prizes be.
There’s many a thousand pound in gold,
For many a jolly sailor bold,
Who did his enemies controul,
                  Like Britons bold.

[VERSE 6]
Proud Lewis says, we understand,
That he will invade our British land;
But if he dare to show his face
Before Prince George’s royal grace,
We’ll make them glad to quit the place,
                  Like Britons bold.

[VERSE 7]
Come, my boy, and let us go
To fight the proud, insulting foe;
Come, let us finish what’s begun,
And see what is for to be done,
We have oft-times beat them four to one,
                  Like Britons bold.

[VERSE 8]
May God protect us in the field,
Against our enemies’ sword and shield;
Then fear not Charley’s Highland plods,
Nor yet proud Lewis’s wooden gods,
But scourge them with good English rods,
                  Like Britons bold.

[VERSE 9]
God bless great George upon the throne,
And may he now enjoy his own;
May God preserve him day and night,
And let him long enjoy his right,
He is all loyal souls’ delight.
                  Like Britons bold.

--- TITLE: The Terrible Privateer [item: PG76941-pg76941-102]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 12696-12746
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
You sailors all of courage bold,
Now a true story I will unfold;
How we behaved you soon shall hear,
On board the Terrible privateer.

[VERSE 2]
We touch’d at Plymouth, it was for men,
Unto the seas we went again,
And being blest with a pleasant gale,
Hop’d with our enemies to prevail.

[VERSE 3]
We had not long been on the sea,
Before a Frenchman we did see;
He was well rigg’d, and come from France,
Her name was call’d the bold Valance.

[VERSE 4]
We crowded all the sail we could,
Our thundering cannons fire we would;
Many a gallant sailor fell,
On board the ship call’d the Terrible.

[VERSE 5]
Powder and ball did fly so fast,
Four hours and a half this fight did last,
But a sad misfortune us befell,
On board the ship call’d the Terrible.

[VERSE 6]
We boldly gave them gun for gun,
Till the blood out of our scuppers run,
Our captain and our mate being slain,
We could no longer the fight maintain.

[VERSE 7]
To board us then they did begin,
And stript us naked to the skin;
They put us all in the hole together,
Where twenty-seven poor souls were smother’d.

[VERSE 8]
They sail’d with us to the first sea port,
And bound us in prison strong;
Where full nine months we did lay,
Before the Carteel did fetch us away.

[VERSE 9]
Here’s a health unto our British fleet,
Grant they with these privateers may meet,
And have better luck than the Terrible,
And sink those Mounsiers all to hell.

--- TITLE: Captain Death [item: PG76941-pg76941-103]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 12747-12793
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
The muse and the hero together are fir’d,
The same noble views has their bosom inspir’d;
As freedom they love, and for glory contend,
The muse o’er the hero still mourns as a friend;
So here let the muse her poor tribute bequeath,
To one British hero--’tis brave Captain Death.
The ship was the Terrible--dreadful to see!
His crew was as brave and as valiant as he;
Two hundred or more was their full complement,
And sure braver fellows to sea never went.
Each man was determined to spend his last breath
In fighting for Britain and brave Captain Death.

[VERSE 2]
A prize they had taken diminish’d their force.
And soon the brave ship was lost in her course;
The French privateer and the Terrible met,
The battle began all with horror beset:
No heart was dismay’d, each bold as Macbeth,
The sailors rejoiced, so did brave Captain Death.

[VERSE 3]
Fire, thunder, balls, bullets, were soon heard and felt,
A sight that the heart of Bellona would melt;
The shrouds were all torn and the decks fill’d with blood,
And scores of dead bodies were thrown in the flood;
The flood, from the time of old Noah and Seth,
Ne’er saw such a man as our brave Captain Death.

[VERSE 4]
At last the dread bullet came wing’d with his fate,
Our brave captain dropt, and soon after his mate;
Each officer fell, and a carnage was seen,
That soon dy’d the waves to a crimson from green;
Then Neptune rose up, and he took off his wreath,
And gave it a triton to crown Captain Death.

[VERSE 5]
Thus fell the strong Terrible, bravely and bold,
But sixteen survivors the tale can unfold;
The French were the victors, tho’ much to their cost,
For many brave French were with Englishmen lost.
For thus says old Time, ‘Since Queen Elizabeth,
I ne’er saw the fellow of brave Captain Death.’

--- TITLE: A New Song (On Blakeney And Byng) [item: PG76941-pg76941-104]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 12794-12835
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come all you brave Britons wherever you be,
Fill up your glasses to brave Blakeney;
O’er a full flowing bowl our voices shall ring,
Huzza for brave Blakeney, and God save the King.
    Sing tantarara shoot Byng, etc.

[VERSE 2]
Here’s a health to brave Blakeney, so stout and so bold,
Who the fort of St. Philip so bravely did hold;
Had he been reinforced by Admiral Byng,
He’d not yielded St. Philip unto the French King.
    Sing tantarara, etc.

[VERSE 3]
And when that he came unto the British shore,
The bells they did ring and the guns they did roar,
In a full flowing bowl his valour shall ring,
Huzza for brave Blakeney and shoot Mr. Byng.
    Sing tantarara, etc.

[VERSE 4]
I had like to have forgot our brave Captain Carr,
When Admiral Byng call’d a council of war;
He boldly made answer, ‘The King sent all we
To defend fort St. Philip, and help brave Blakeney.’
    Sing, etc.

[VERSE 5]
Then he left Admiral B., and away he did steer,
In spite of the guns of the great Galissionère,
In the fort of St. Philip he landed his men,
And sank the brave Dolphin in the harbour then.
    Sing, etc.

[VERSE 6]
So God save our admirals who are loyal and right,
For their King and country like Blakeney they’ll fight.
And those who are treach’rous in a halter let swing,
Huzza for brave Blakeney, and God save the King.
    Sing, etc.

--- TITLE: The Letter Of A Certain Admiral [item: PG76941-pg76941-105]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 12836-12903
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Mr. Cleveland, I pray, to their lordships you’ll say
  We are glad and rejoice above measure:
When you have read what is writ you, you’ll laugh till it split you,
  And so give me joy of my pleasure.
We’d a wind, you must know, as fair as could blow,
  And therefore in days just eleven,
We had sail’d from the shore, full ten leagues or more,
  And saw nought but the ocean and heaven.

[VERSE 2]
Then seventeen ships came licking their lips.
  And crying out, ‘Fee, faw and fum’;
Bigger each than Saint Paul; guns, the devil and all;
  And, egad, looking wondrous glum.

[VERSE 3]
But no matter for that, who says pit-a-pat?
  We tack’d, and we stood to the weather;
We tack’d quite about, right and left, brave and stout,
  And so we were sideways together.

[VERSE 4]
Souls five score and two, maugre all they could do,
  We took in a tartan alive;
Six hundred did sail in the vessel so frail,
  But our hundred had eat up the five.

[VERSE 5]
But of this by the bye; for now we drew nigh
  To each other--quite close--nay, ’tis true;
Six times two of the line, large, grand, bright and fine;
  Five frigates! but look’d rather blue.
‘Fair honour,’ quoth I, ‘in thy arms let me die,
  And my glory burn clear in the socket’;
Not an ounce more of powder, or a gun a note louder,
  So the directions I put in my pocket.

[VERSE 6]
Brave West led the van, I follow’d amain;
  Such closing, and raking, and work,
With foresails and braces all flutt’ring in pieces,
  ’Twould have melted the heart of a Turk.

[VERSE 7]
But the devil, in spite, to blast our delight,
  Got aboard the Intrepid, his daughter;
Made her jump, fly, and jumble, reel, elbow, and tumble,
  And drove us quite out of the water.

[VERSE 8]
And now, being tea-time, we thought it was the time
  To talk over what we had done;
So we put on the kettle our tempers to settle;--
  And presently set the fair sun.

[VERSE 9]
Our council next day, in seemly array,
  Met, sat, and debated the story:
We found that our fleet at last might be beat,
  And then, you know, where is the glory?
Moreover, ’twas plain, three ships in the van
  Had their glasses and china all broke;
And this gave the balance, in spite of great talents,
  Against us--a damnable stroke!

[VERSE 10]
Without fear of reproaches, as sound as your roaches,
  Of glory we’ve sav’d our whole stock;
’Twere pity, indeed, to lose it, or bleed,
  For a toothless old man and a rock.

--- TITLE: A Rueful Story, Admiral B----G’S Glory, Or Who Run Away First [item: PG76941-pg76941-106]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 12904-12962
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Give ear, ye sons of glory,
Of greater deeds I sing
  Than e’er were recorded in story,
All done by great Admiral Byng.
  Sing, sing, O rare Admiral Byng.

[VERSE 2]
  It was in the very same sea, sir,
His father’s fleet did swim:
  His father fought well, we agree, sir,
But his father was nothing like him.
  Sing, sing, O great Admiral Byng.

[VERSE 3]
  At first he came to Gibraltar,
Where he was for succours to call;
  But wisely his orders did alter,
And took no succours at all.
  Sing, sing, O wise Admiral Byng.

[VERSE 4]
  While Portmahon was invaded,
And Blakeney defended the fort,
  In the sea for a while he paraded,
And then took a peep at the port.
  Sing, sing, O bold Admiral Byng.

[VERSE 5]
  At length he descried the foe, sir,
Whom he bravely determined to beat,
  If he cou’d without striking a blow, sir,
Or hurting his Majesty’s fleet.
  Sing, sing, O brave Admiral Byng.

[VERSE 6]
  And when the engagement began, sir,
The admiral stuck to his plan;
  For he fought without firing a gun, sir,
Or loosing a single man.
  Sing, sing, O rare Admiral Byng.

[VERSE 7]
  West gallantly charg’d in the van, sir,
Without dismay or fear;
  But Byng, who would not risk a man, sir,
Kept cautiously snug in the rear.
  Sing, sing, great Rear-Admiral Byng.
  At length the French run away, sir,
As Frenchmen are apt to do:
  But he scorn’d to give them foul play, sir,
So he civilly run away too.
  Sing, sing, generous Admiral Byng.

[VERSE 8]
  For behaving so well in the ocean,
At least he deserves well a string;
  And if he wou’d sue for promotion,
I hope they will give him his swing.
  Swing, swing, O rare Admiral Byng!

--- TITLE: Admiral Byng And Brave West [item: PG76941-pg76941-107]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 12963-12994
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
I said unto brave West, ‘Take the van, take the van,’
I said unto brave West, ‘Take the van.’
          I said unto brave West,
          ‘As you like fighting best,
          I in the rear will rest,
                Take the van.’

[VERSE 2]
Brave West did boldly act in the van, in the van,
Brave West did boldly act in the van;
          As he did boldly act,
          I call’d my own ships back;
          Else he’d put the French to wrack
                Near Mahon.

[VERSE 3]
Oh! woe to cursed gold! ohon! ohon!
Oh! woe to cursed gold! ohon!
          Oh! woe to cursed gold;
          For Minorca I have sold,
          That gallant place of old,
                With Mahon!

[VERSE 4]
It’s decreed by the King, I do hear, I do hear,
He’s decreed it the nation to please,
          It’s decreed by the King,
          I’ll be shot by my marines,
          For the misdeed I have deen
                On the seas.

--- TITLE: A New Song Written On The Isle Of Aix [item: PG76941-pg76941-108]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 12995-13034
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
I am a sailor bold, and press’d to served the King,
I am sent upon an errand some laurels home to bring:
I am now on the coast, boys, where they are to be had,
But alas! I dare not gather them, which makes me raving mad.
    Mad, boys, mad. Alas! I dare not gather them, which makes me
        raving mad.
It’s enough to make a dog mad, to see a pudding creep.
If he could not get at it, he’d bark and howl and weep;
Methinks I see the laurels grow and easy to be had,
Alas! I dare not gather them, which makes me raving mad.
                                      Mad, boys, mad, etc.

[VERSE 2]
My master has a nosegay, but it is not compleat,
Tho’ the royal rose of England is excellently sweet;
The laurel and French lilly in plenty may be had:
Alas! I dare not gather them, which makes me raving mad.
                                      Mad, boys, mad, etc.

[VERSE 3]
The Derbyshire and Cheshire boys by Henry were sent
To fetch the Flower-de-Luce home, and chearfully they went;
They brought it home to England which made their hearts full glad;
But if their hands had been confin’d they all had been stark mad,
Alas! I dare not gather them, which makes me raving mad.
                                      Mad, boys, mad, etc.

[VERSE 4]
If I without my errand to England do return,
Alas! I fear in effigy my body they will burn;
The boys will hollow after me, as I do pass along,
And evry Grub-street printer will curse me in a song.
    Song, boys, song. And every Grub-street printer will curse me
        in a song.

--- TITLE: Bold Sawyer [item: PG76941-pg76941-109]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 13035-13129
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come all ye jolly sailors with courage stout and bold,
Come enter with bold Sawyer, he’ll cloath you all in gold;
    Repair on board the old Nassau,
    As fine a ship as e’er you saw,
    We’ll make the French to stand in awe;
      She’s mann’d with British boys.

[VERSE 2]
Commander Keppel with his good design,
Commanded the squadron, five sail of the line,
    The Prince Edward of forty guns,
    The Firedrake and Furnace bombs,
    To take Goree it must be done,
      By true British boys.
The 29th of October from Spithead we set sail,
Kind Neptune convey’d us with a sweet and pleasant gale,
    So steering on the Barbary shore,
    Distance about twelve leagues or more,
    The wind at west aloud did roar;
      Stand by, ye British boys.

[VERSE 3]
So, steering on the lee-shore until the break of day,
We spy’d a lofty sail on the Barbary shore to lay,
    In great distress she seem’d to be,
    Her guns all overboard threw she,
    Which prov’d the Lichfield for to be,
      With all her British boys.

[VERSE 4]
The wind blowing hard, we could give them no relief,
A stretching on the lee shore we touch’d at Teneriff.
    So watering the ships at Santa Cruz,
    Taking good wine for our ship’s use,
    We sold our cloaths good wine to booze,
      Like brave British boys.

[VERSE 5]
Our ship being water’d and plenty of good wine,
We hoisted up our top-sails and crost the tropic line.
    The wind at west the leading gale,
    Our gallant ship did sweetly sail;
    Steady along she ne’er will fail,
      With all her British boys.

[VERSE 6]
‘Steady a port! don’t bring her by the lee!
Yonder is the flag-staff at Goree, I do see.’
    We brought the city within sight,
    Anchor’d in Goree bay that night,
    Clear’d our ships ready to fight,
      Like brave British boys.

[VERSE 7]
Early next morning the Prince Edward of forty guns
Was station’d off the island to cover our two bombs,
    The old Nassau she led the van,
    With all her jovial fighting men,
    The drums did beat ‘to quarter stand,’
      Like brave British boys.

[VERSE 8]
We sail’d up to their batteries as close as we could lay,
Our guns from the top and poop aloud did play,
    Which made the French cry ‘Morbleu!
    Diable! what shall we do?
    Here comes bold Sawyer and all his crew,
      They’re all British boys.’

[VERSE 9]
Then, follow’d by the Dunkirk and Torbay,
The guns aloud did rattle and shells did play,
    Which made the French their batteries shun,
    And from their trenches for to run,
    The flag was struck, the fight was done,
      O huzza! my British boys.

[VERSE 10]
The Nassau and Dunkirk and Torbay of renown,
Three as fine ships as belong to the crown,
    The only ships that fought so free,
    In taking of the isle of Goree,
      They are all British boys.

[VERSE 11]
Boast not of Frenchmen nor yet of Maclome,
Sawyer’s as big a hero as ever you did hear,
    Whilst the shot around him did flee,
    In engaging twice the isle of Goree,
    As valiant men as ever you see,
      They are all British boys.

[VERSE 12]
Here’s a health to King George our sovereign majesty,
Likewise to bold Sawyer that fought the French so free,
    Our officers and all our crew
    Are valiant men as e’er you knew,
    So here’s a health to each true blue,
      My brave British boys.

--- TITLE: Captain Barton’S Distress On Board The Lichfield, Being Under Slavery Seventeen Months And Fourteen Days [item: PG76941-pg76941-110]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 13130-13195
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come all you brave seamen that plows on the main,
Give ear to my story I’m true to maintain;
Concerning the Lichfield that was cast away
On the Barbary shore by the dawn of the day.
The tenth of November, the weather being fine,
We sailed from Kingsale, five ships of the line,
With two bombs and two frigates with transports also,
We was bound unto Goree to fight our proud foe.

[VERSE 2]
The 29th of November, by dawn of the light,
We spied land that put us in a fright,
We strove for to weather, but we run quite aground,
The seas mountain high made our sorrow abound.

[VERSE 3]
Our mast we cut away, our wreck for to ease,
And being exposed to the mercy of the seas;
Where one hundred and thirty poor seamen did die,
Whilst we all for mercy most loudly did cry.

[VERSE 4]
Two hundred and twenty of us got on shore;
No sooner we landed but strip’d by the Moors,
Without any subsistence but dead hogs and sheep,
That was drove on shore by the sea from the ship.

[VERSE 5]
For seven days together we thus did remain,
Our bodys quite naked for to increase our pain;
Till some Christian merchant that lives in the land,
He sent us relief by his bountiful hand,

[VERSE 6]
Unto our fleet the same fate did share,
Then unto Morocco we all marched there,
Where they are captives in slavery to be,
Till old England thought proper for to set them free.

[VERSE 7]
When the black king we all come before,
He stroked his long beard, and by Mahomet he swore,
‘They are all stout and able and fit for the hoe,
Pray to my gardens, pray let them go.’

[VERSE 8]
We had cruel Moors our drivers to be,
By the dawn of the day at the hoe we must be;
Untill four o’clock in the afternoon,
Without any remission, boys, work was our doom.

[VERSE 9]
If that you offer for to strike a Moor,
Straightway to the king they will have you before,
Where they will basternade you till you have your fill,
If that will not do, your blood they will spill.

[VERSE 10]
So now in Morocco we shall remain,
Untill our ambassador crosses the main;
Where our ransom he’ll bring, and soon set us free,
And then to Gibraltar we’ll go speedily.

[VERSE 11]
So now, my brave boys, to old England we’re bound,
We will have store of liquors our sorrow to drown.
We will drink a good health, success never fall
Bad cess to the bawd and the whores of Kingsale.

--- TITLE: Gilchrist [And] Hotham’S Bravery: A New Song [item: PG76941-pg76941-111]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 13196-13254
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
You heroes of England, I pray you attend
Unto these new verses, which lately were penn’d;
It’s of a bloody battle, I tell you plain,
Fought by Captain Hotham on the raging main.

[VERSE 2]
His ship she is called Melampe by name,
Of thirty-six guns, a fine frigate of fame;
As he was a cruising one day by great chance,
He espied a frigate belonging to France

[VERSE 3]
Who many rich prizes from England had ta’en,
When Hotham espied her on the raging main.
‘I’m glad that I’ve found her,’ he then did reply;
‘Thou shalt go to England, or else by thee I’ll die.’

[VERSE 4]
The wind being fair, we soon her overtook,
She was full of men, and boldly they look;
She turned then upon us, with abundance of pride,
And instantly gave us a thundering broadside.

[VERSE 5]
We gave them another, as good as they sent;
To take, or be taken, was our full intent.
Their metal was heavy, yet we did not care,
But stood to our quarters, and did them not fear.

[VERSE 6]
Like true British heroes our guns we did play,
‘Fight boldly,’ says Hotham, ‘we shall win the day.
When as she is ta’en, for your valour so rare,
Ev’ry man in the ship shall have his just share.’

[VERSE 7]
The Southampton she then triumphant did ride,
Brave Gilchrist he gave them a warming broadside.
With true British courage our guns we did load,
Which brought down her masts close by the board.

[VERSE 8]
Upon Gilchrist’s shoulder a ball did graze;
But the wound was not fatal, the Lord be prais’d;
And tho’ he was so wounded, he smiling did say,
‘She is so disabled, she can’t run away.’

[VERSE 9]
She struck to us quickly, we boarded her then,
We killed her more than an hundred men;
The father and son they both captains were,
And dy’d of their wounds, for truth we do hear.

[VERSE 10]
Sure valianter captains never drew breath,
Than Gilchrist and Hotham, unless it was Death.
God prosper them both unto their lives end;
By a true loyal subject these verses were penn’d.

--- TITLE: Hawke’S Engagement [item: PG76941-pg76941-112]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 13255-13309
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
The fourteenth of November, in Torbay as we lay,
Bold Hawke did hoist his flag, sir, and came on board that day.
Kind Neptune did protect us, with a sweet and pleasant breeze,
We hoisted up our topsails, to cross the raging seas.
We had not crossed the raging seas full thirty leagues or more,
We spy’d a sail to windward, and down on us she bore.
O then he hail’d our admiral, and thus to him did say:
‘The French fleet’s all sailed out, sir, and bound for Quiberon Bay.’

[VERSE 2]
‘Can you tell me at what distance, and where about they lay?’
‘O yes, kind sir,’ he then replied, ‘it’s thirty leagues to-day.
There’s twenty-two sail of the line to leeward of us do lie,
All clean and tight for action as ever you did see.’

[VERSE 3]
Then up bespoke our captain bold, to Edward Hawke did say:
‘This is the finest news, sir, that’s brought to us this day.’
Then Hawke himself soon mounted upon the lofty yard;
His wings were spread at large, my boys, and after them we steer’d.

[VERSE 4]
The fifteenth of November, the morning being clear,
When twenty-two sail of the line to leeward did appear.
All hands! all hands! did rattle, a glorious sight to see;
Unto the fight prepar’d, my boys, like lions bold and free.

[VERSE 5]
We steer’d unto the French fleet as near as we could ly,
Till twelve of them engaged us, and that most speedily.
They made a bloody battle, the like was never seen;
The first broadside we gave them, boys, we laid them on their beams.

[VERSE 6]
‘Oh! that’s a glorious broadside,’ our admiral replies;
‘Now give them such another, their ships will be a prize.’
Like thunder on the French fleet our cannons they did roar,
We sunk the pride of France, my boys, all on their native shore.

[VERSE 7]
O! don’t you see the pride of France to the depths is going down,
With many a dismal sigh, sir, and many a grievous groan.
Conflans was sore affrighted, he could no longer stay;
The rest of them turn’d tail, my boys, like cowards ran away.

[VERSE 8]
O, then they steer’d for Corjack Bay, where we led them a dance,
It proved to be the fatal blow that sunk the crown of France.
The Rising Sun we burn’d, and the poor Prince likewise,
And two of them we sunk, my boys, and one we made our prize.

[VERSE 9]
So now the fight is over, fill up a flowing bowl;
Whilst we’re upon the raging seas there’s none can us controul.
Here’s a health to all commanders that are loyal just and true,
Likewise unto Sir Edward Hawke, and the Royal George’s crew.

--- TITLE: Neptune’S Resignation [item: PG76941-pg76941-113]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 13310-13376
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
The wat’ry god, great Neptune, lay
In dalliance soft and amorous play
  On Amphitrite’s breast;
When uproar rear’d its horrid head,
The Tritons shrunk, the Nereids fled,
  And all their fear confess’d.

[VERSE 2]
Loud thunder shook the vast domain,
The liquid world was wrapt in flame,
  The god amazed spoke:
‘Ye winds go forth and make it known
Who dares to shake my coral throne,
  And fill my realms with smoke!’

[VERSE 3]
The winds, obsequious at his word,
Sprung strongly up t’ obey their lord,
  And saw two fleets a-weigh:
The one, victorious Hawke, was thine;
The other, Conflans’ wretched line,
  In terror and dismay.

[VERSE 4]
Appal’d, they view Britannia’s sons
Deal death and slaughter from their guns,
  And strike the deadly blow,
Which caused ill-fated Gallic slaves
To find a tomb in briny waves,
  And sink to shades below.

[VERSE 5]
With speed they fly and tell their chief
That France was ruin’d past relief,
  And Hawke triumphant rode.
‘Hawke!’ cry’d the fair, ‘pray who is he
That dare usurp this power at sea,
  And thus insult a god?’

[VERSE 6]
The winds reply: ‘In distant lands
There reigns a king who Hawke commands;
  He scorns all foreign force;
And when his floating castles roll,
From sea to sea, from pole to pole,
  Great Hawke directs their course.

[VERSE 7]
‘Or when his winged bullets fly
To punish fraud and perfidy,
  Or scourge a guilty land,
Then gallant Hawke, serenely great,
Tho’ death and horror round him wait,
  Performs his dread command!’

[VERSE 8]
Neptune with wonder heard the story
Of George’s sway and Britain’s glory,
  Which time shall ne’er subdue;
Boscawen’s deeds, and Saunders’ fame,
Join’d with brave Wolfe’s immortal name,
  Then cry’d, ‘Can this be true?

[VERSE 9]
‘A king! he sure must be a god!
Who has such heroes at his nod,
  To govern earth and sea!
I yield my trident and my crown,
A tribute due to such renown!
  Great George shall rule for me!’

--- TITLE: Thurot’S Dream [item: PG76941-pg76941-115]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 13415-13471
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
The twenty-first of February, as I’ve heard the people say,
Three French ships of war came and anchored in our bay:
They hoisted English colours and landed at Kilroot,
And marched their men for Carrick without further dispute.

[VERSE 2]
Colonel Jennings being there, at that pretty town,
His heart it was a-breaking while the enemy came down;
He could not defend it for the want of powder and ball,
And aloud to his enemies for ‘quarter’ did call.
As Thurot in his cabin lay he dreamed a dream:
That his grandsire’s voice came to him and called him by his name,
Saying, ‘Thurot, your’e to blame for lying so long here,
For the English will be in this night, the wind it bloweth fair.’

[VERSE 3]
Then Thurot started up, and said unto his men:
‘Weigh your anchors, my brave lads, and let us begone;
We’ll go off this very night, make all the haste you can,
And we’ll steer south and south-east, straight for the Isle of Man.’
Upon the next day the wind it blew north-west,
And Elliot’s gallant seamen they sorely were oppressed;
They could not get in that night, the wind it blew so high;
And as for Monsieur Thurot, he was forced for to lie by.

[VERSE 4]
Early the next morning, as daylight did appear,
Brave Elliot he espied them, which gave to him great cheer.
It gave to him great cheer, and he to his men did say:
‘Boys, yonder’s Monsieur Thurot, we’ll shew him warm play.’
The first ship that came up was the Brilliant without doubt,
She gave to them a broadside, and then she wheeled about;
The other two then followed her, and fired another round.
‘Oh, oh! my lads,’ says Thurot; ‘this is not Carrick town.’

[VERSE 5]
Then out cried Monsieur Thurot, with his visage pale and wan:
‘Strike, strike your colours, brave boys, or they’ll sink us--every
    man;
Their weighty shot comes in so hot on both the weather and the lee;
Strike your colours, my brave boys, or they’ll sink us in the sea.’

[VERSE 6]
Before they got their colours struck great slaughter there was made,
And many a gallant Frenchman on Thurot’s decks lay dead;
They came tumbling down the shrouds, upon his deck they lay,
While our brave Irish heroes cut their booms and yards away.

# APPARATUS: *       *       *       *       *

[VERSE 7]
And as for Monsieur Thurot, as I’ve heard people say,
He was taken up by Elliot’s men and buried in Ramsey Bay.

[VERSE 8]
Now for to conclude, and put an end unto my song,
To drink a health to Elliot, I hope it is not wrong;
And may all French invaders be served the same way;
Let the English beat the French by land, our Irish boys on sea.

--- TITLE: A New Song On The Gallant Behaviour Of Captain O’Brian And Captain Taylor [item: PG76941-pg76941-116]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 13472-13522
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Observe this true relation, and listen unto me;
’Tis of a bloody battle, lately fought upon the sea,
By brave Captain O’Brian and his bold English tars,
Commander of that gallant ship, the Temple man-of-war.

[VERSE 2]
The pretty little Griffin did bear her company;
And as they were a-sailing by chance they did espy,
Nigh unto Martinico they did espy there fair,
Three privateers belonging to the French, and after them did steer.

[VERSE 3]
O’Brian said, ‘My English lads, now is the only time
To cool the lofty Frenchmen’s pride as they sail in their prime’;
They answered their captain, ‘We will the Frenchmen scare,
We’ll venture life and limbs with you in the Temple man-of-war.’

[VERSE 4]
The wind it proved fair, and we after them did steer,
And in a little time, brave boys, we did to them draw near;
A broadside then we gave them, which made the Frenchmen stare,
They little dream’d so nigh they’d got the Temple man-of-war.

[VERSE 5]
The pretty little Griffin behaved most manfully,
Like showers of hail from our two ships our fiery balls did fly;
The privateers they all three struck to us immediately,
And from their batteries they fir’d, but could not us come nigh.
We turned unto their batteries and briskly fired away,
Until their guns and walls, brave boys, came tumbling in the sea;
Their forces they did run for fear, they were so sorely scar’d,
At the pretty little Griffin bold and the Temple man-of-war.

[VERSE 6]
Then further in the harbour two ships we did espy,
Also a strong grand battery, and at them we let fly.
For four days we did stay there, and every night and morn
We did give them a grand salute, and we fired our evening guns.

[VERSE 7]
Two batteries we did then destroy, and five ships took away,
And brought them safe to Guadaloupe, where now they all do stay.
There is but one man kill’d, behold, and five that wounded are,
In the pretty little Griffin bold and the Temple man-of-war.

--- TITLE: A New Song On The Taking Of Havannah [item: PG76941-pg76941-117]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 13523-13600
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Give ear, true Britons to my song, and joyful acclamations;
’Tis the noble deeds now done by our own relations.
While Albemarle did command, Pocock and General Keppel:
Let Moro Fort, and Spaniards vaunt if Britons be unable.

[VERSE 2]
Against Havannah we set sail, with a fleet of combination;
Land troops we likewise had on board, to pay off Spain’s aggression.
We moor’d our ships, and landed our troops, the Spaniards came down
    raging;
But they found we were true British boys, as we their fury were
    swaging.
We chac’d the Spaniards thro’ the woods, and hunted them like mawkin,
And turn’d up hundreds in their fuds, the rest ran homeward quaking.
For though they came in thousands on, our fire would make them
    scatter,
But we true Britons kept our ground, while blood did run like water.

[VERSE 3]
The Spaniards judg’d the Moro’s fort the Briton’s strength would
    banter,
But when we blew it up i’ the air, they tuned another chanter.
Bold Harvey with three noble ships their walls by sea did batter,
While we bombarded it on land, and did their out-works clatter.

[VERSE 4]
But never was heard such woful thuds as the Cambridge and
    Marlborough did give ’em
The Dragon fired as brisk as they, but for smoak none could
    perceive them.
The Cambridge got her captain shot, and a hundred more beside him,
Brave Harvey then his station quit, for five long hours he try’d
    them.
But finding it bomb and cannon proof, we then did give it over,
And sprung a mine below their walls, which split the rocks in
    shivers.
Some Spaniards went up with the blast, which made their fellows
    wonder,
Such a hideous roar ne’er heard before, it far exceeded thunder.

[VERSE 5]
Then we approach’d upon a breach, our firelocks cock’d and ready,
Where the Spaniards met us for a brush, imploring on their Lady
To aid Velasco a Spaniard bold, a valiant sea commander,
Who vow’d for to defend his fort, while Marza kept up his standard.

[VERSE 6]
O, then began the bloody fray, with bayonets and broad swords
    champing,
Through bones and bellies we made our way, and dying men under us
    trampling;
Of seven hundred Spaniards here, scarce left alive was eighty,
Velasco by his standard fell, whose deeds were counted mighty.
Then to Havannah we did march, and trenches rais’d like mountains,
Then cut away their water pipes, which supplied them with fresh
    fountains,
Our batteries then began to play, with roars aloud like thunder,
Which dash’d their walls and chimnies down, yet loath for to knock
    under.

[VERSE 7]
O, then with bombs and fiery balls, threatened their utter ruin,
Which rais’d such cries, as pierc’d the skies, for mercy they were
    suing.
Juan de Prado to British tars was loath to be subjected,
But brave Albemarle told him his fate was then to be ransacked,

[VERSE 8]
Or buried in the city’s ruin, him and his whole fraternity;
This made him to subjection yield, and so they were disarmed;
All stores and treasures of the place are bought by Briton’s glory,
Seven ships; their arms and everything, and that’s a noble story.

[VERSE 9]
O, then with honour we lin’d their gates, and bravery to our wishing,
And turn’d Don Spaniard from their posts, which they held by
    commission;
May our noble King prosper long, and all his brave commanders,
Who bravely led on Britain’s sons, to knock down popish standards.

--- TITLE: Lord Anson And Hawke [item: PG76941-pg76941-118]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 13601-13634
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Ye brave British sailors, true sons of the main,
Who scorn to submit to the insults of Spain,
Leave to landsmen their politick schemes and their talk,
And enter on board the Lord Anson and Hawke.
These two noble heroes, whose names our ships bear,
Made the Spaniards to tremble, the Frenchmen to fear;
Secure of success, then, your fortune ne’er balk,
But enter on board the Lord Anson and Hawke.

[VERSE 2]
Let the wise politicians of France and of Spain,
Threat to take from Great Britain her rule o’er the main;
Their plate ships shall pay for their arrogant talk,
If they come but in sight of the Anson and Hawke.
The wages, the ingots, the wealth of Peru,
The Spaniards are getting and hoarding for you;
You shall ride in your coaches, whilst cowards shall walk,
Who durst not engage in the Anson and Hawke.

[VERSE 3]
Then aboard, my brave lads, and with hearts stout and true,
The road unto riches and glory pursue;
That your wives may dress fine, and your children may talk
Of your noble exploits in the Anson and Hawke.
Here’s a health to King George, and his consort so true,
May their laurels sit pleasing and well on their brow;
To Hutchinson and Dickson, who for courage never baulk,
Then fill up your glasses, boys, to the Lord Anson and Hawke.
    Huzza, brave boys, the Lord Anson and Hawke.

--- TITLE: A New Song On The Blandford Privateer [item: PG76941-pg76941-119]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 13635-13669
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Ye seamen who’ve a mind to go in pursuit of new adventures,
Repair on board the Blandford, with Captain Stonehouse enter,
Who cruizing goes to meet his foes, such pastime sure must please us,
We’ll prizes make of all we take; this will to fortune raise us.

[VERSE 2]
Here is our chief encouragement, our ship belongs to Bristol,
Poor Londoners when coming home, they surely will be press’d all:
We’ve no such fear when home we steer with prizes under convoy,
We’ll frolick round all Bristol town, sweet liberty we enjoy.

[VERSE 3]
Why should we here our time delay, in London void of pleasure,
Let’s haste away to Biscay Bay, and ransack there for treasure.
Here we must creep and play bo-peep, to shun the damn’d press
    masters,
We live in strife, even die in life, confin’d by catch-pole bastards.

[VERSE 4]
A health to Captain Stonehouse, success attend the Blandford,
Five guineas is advanced us, come then let us enter on board;
With the Blandford’s guns we’ll smoak the Dons, their ragged
    staff we’ll humble,
Jack Frenchmen too shall cry morbleu, we’ll give them cause to
    grumble.

[VERSE 5]
Come fill your flowing glasses, let us drink and be merry;
Take leave of all your lasses, we can no longer tarry;
Girls, never fear, ye soon shall hear of the Blandford’s safe
    arrival,
To Bristol town then haste ye down, your sweethearts to revive all.

--- TITLE: The Sailors’ Dialogue [item: PG76941-pg76941-120]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 13670-13739
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
# APPARATUS: TOM.
How goes it, brother Jack? You are grown such a beau now,
Had I but seen your back damn me if I had known you,
                                          Brother Jack.

# APPARATUS: JACK.

[VERSE 2]
What cheer, old messmate Tom? You look as if you’d cry now;
But I have news from home will make you jump mast high now,
                                        Messmate Tom.

[VERSE 3]
Since our brave towering Hawke has shown the French his talons,
’Twill soon be peace they talk; if so we’ll drink off gallons
                                        To brave Hawke.

# APPARATUS: TOM.

[VERSE 4]
Huzza! my hearty cock! For this news damn all sorrow,
I’ll pawn my shirt and frock, but I’ll get drunk to-morrow,
                                             Hearty cock!

# APPARATUS: JACK.

[VERSE 5]
When all the ship are paid we’ll lead a merry life, boy;
Blood! then how we’ll parade with ev’ry one his wife, boy,
                                         When we’re paid.

# APPARATUS: TOM.

[VERSE 6]
Nay, some will have their pairs, they’ll be so open-hearted;
And brimstones will have chairs, that rather should be carted,
                                              All in pairs,

# APPARATUS: JACK.

[VERSE 7]
Our proud lieutenants then, those empty flashing sporters,
May pimps turn to great men, companions to their porters,
                                          Not proud then.

[VERSE 8]
# APPARATUS: TOM.
Our midshipmen now beaux, it makes me laugh to think, boys,
Will cry about old cloaths, and corporals turn link-boys
                                          To those beaux.

# APPARATUS: JACK.

[VERSE 9]
Amongst the damn’d odd scenes you’ll see in jails and cages
Lieutenants of marines, and doctors’ mates on stages.
                                       Damn’d odd scenes.

# APPARATUS: TOM.

[VERSE 10]
The steward, dirty slave, that us’d to cheat us daily,
Will still remain a knave, and follow some bum-baily.
                                             Dirty slave!

# APPARATUS: BOTH.

[VERSE 11]
That day then, jolly buck, we’ll set the taps a-flowing,
And drink ‘rest and great luck’ to Pitt, Hawke, and Boscawen,
                                              Jolly buck!

--- TITLE: Distressed Men Of War [item: PG76941-pg76941-121]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 13740-13791
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Says Jack, ‘There is very good news; there is peace both by land
    and by sea;
Great guns no more shall be used, for we all disbanded must be.’

[VERSE 2]
Says the admiral, ‘That’s very bad news;’ says the captain, ‘My
    heart it will break;’
The lieutenant cries, ‘What shall I do? for I know not what course
    for to take.’

[VERSE 3]
Says the purser, ‘I’m a gentleman born; my coat is lined with gold,
And my chest is full of the same, by cheating of sailors so bold.’

[VERSE 4]
Says the doctor, ‘I’m a gentleman too, I’m a gentleman of the first
    rank;
I will go to some country fair, and there I’ll set up mountebank.’

[VERSE 5]
Says the steward, ‘I’m sorry it’s peace, for I love my ship as my
    life,
And by cheating of honest Jack Tars I have plenty of shiners so
    bright.’

[VERSE 6]
Says the carpenter, ‘I have a chest, a chest of very good tools;
I will go to some country fair and there I’ll sell three-legged
    stools.’

[VERSE 7]
Says the cook, ‘I will go to that fair, and there I will sell all
    my fat.’
Says Jack Tar, ‘If I should meet you there, damn me, I’ll pay you
    for that;

[VERSE 8]
‘For don’t you remember the time our topsail stuck close to the tack,
And we all stuck fast in the sheet, for want of some of that fat?’

[VERSE 9]
Says the midshipman, ‘I have no trade; I have got my trade for to
    chuse:
I will go to St. James Park gate, and there I’ll set blacking of
    shoes;

[VERSE 10]
‘And there I will set all the day, at everybody’s call,
And every one that comes by, “Do you want my nice shining balls?”’

[VERSE 11]
Says Jack, ‘I will take to the road, for I’d better do that than
    do worse;
And every one that comes by, I’ll cry, “Damn you, deliver your
    purse.”’

--- TITLE: The Sailor’S Complaint [item: PG76941-pg76941-122]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 13792-13842
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
‘You are welcome to London, dear Jack.
  What news have you brought us, I pray?’
‘From Portsmouth I have lately come,
  And now I am discharg’d from the sea.
I have never a copper, brave boy;
  I’ve wages and prize money due.’
‘Damme Jack, truly do say,
  You will be hard set to get it, it’s true.’

[VERSE 2]
‘Dear shipmate, I’ve been here a month,
  And cannot get mine for the truth;
On board a man-of-war I went
  When I was a frolicsome youth.
My king and my country to serve
  I fought like a sailor so bold.
Now that the wars are all over
  I really cannot get my gold.

[VERSE 3]
‘To a navy officer each day I did go;
  I’ve been both hungry and dry.
My money I then did demand.
  “You cannot have it,” they cry.
My life I have ventur’d for gold,
  My king and my country to serve.
Now the wars are all over
  Brave sailors may perish and starve.

[VERSE 4]
‘Suppose that the war should break out,
  Then what will Old England do?
Bad usage we plenty receive
  By not paying us our due.
They will cavvil from day to day,
  “To-morrow you your answer shall have.”’
‘Damme Jack, I really do say,
  For I think they are acting the knave.’

[VERSE 5]
‘Then truely I don’t mean to rebel
  Against my good king and his laws.
Did he then know my distress
  He soon would relieve my just cause;
We should be paid with great speed.
  The taverns we’d make them to roar,
We’d spend it like brave jolly tars;
  What else should we do on shore?’

--- TITLE: The Sailor’S Garland; Or, The Ticket Buyer’S Lamentation [item: PG76941-pg76941-123]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 13843-13915
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
God prosper long our noble King, his fleet and sailors all,
And grant that they their pay may have, and pride may have a fall.

[VERSE 2]
Where courage stout and noble blood within the heart doth reign,
There pity soft for others’ woes doth pant in every vein.

[VERSE 3]
Our gracious King, by pity moved to do his sailors right,
To Parliament did recommend their sad and woful plight.

[VERSE 4]
A usurer in Lothbury, a Jew of high renown,
Hearing the sailors would be paid strait hasted up to town;

[VERSE 5]
All in his hall the clerks amazed and agents, frighted sore,
‘Adieu,’ cried out, ‘for-ty per cent, Adieu--for evermore.’

[VERSE 6]
The Jew he sighed, ‘Alack, my head and heart it acheth much!
But hold,’ says he, ‘I’ve got it now. Pray tell me--won’t they touch?

[VERSE 7]
‘What, pay the Navy all, d’you say? Sure that can never be,
For then much greater men must lose their trades as well as we.
‘A Sanhedrim we straight must call upon a thing so new.
Go summon all, great Shylock first; he’s trusty and true blue.’

[VERSE 8]
While yet he spake, lo at the gate, the head of all the tribe,
Shylock, appear’d, the most expert at counsel or at bribe.

[VERSE 9]
His chatter and his laugh so loud was heard quite to the door;
His belly, of enormous size, came strutting in before.

[VERSE 10]
Soon tawny Shadrach plodded in, whose face and wig contend
Which in their hue most like shall be to Belzeebub the fiend.

[VERSE 11]
Shadrach from father circumcis’d a wight descended sure,
Either from Abraham the Jew or Ismael the Moor.

[VERSE 12]
‘I stopt,’ quoth he, ‘by precedent the pinch-gut halfpenny,
Tho’ tars on short allowance starv’d, and better they than we.’

[VERSE 13]
From Tower Hill with hang-dog look came one would move your pity.
‘What, no more tickets, sir?’ said he; ‘’twill ruin our trading
    city.’
Quoth Shylock with a grin, ‘My friends, when ships to Greenland sail
They dexterously throw out a tub to fool the mighty whale.

[VERSE 14]
‘Prompt payment publickly to blame may prove a dangerous scheme;
Another project we’ll propose for to direct the stream.

[VERSE 15]
‘Something, be sure, must needs be paid. Let’s give them two months’
    certain:
The other four you friends shall share--with me behind the curtain.

[VERSE 16]
‘Their wages too we must advance some shillings augmentation:
What tho’ it freightage should destroy, that only hurts the nation.

[VERSE 17]
‘As toasted cheese the mouse allures within the trap to venture,
Such baits as these will surely make the heedless seamen enter.

[VERSE 18]
‘When once they’re caught we’ll turn ’em o’er for ever and for ay;
They’ll then be volunteers for life, and we’ll divide their pay.

[VERSE 19]
‘Whilst cent. per cent. our friends can gain we are sure of being
    courted,
Nor can the sailors well complain, for they will be transported.’

[VERSE 20]
But these their plots we know our liege will all to nothing bring;
Then sailors may throw up their caps and cry, ‘God save the King.’

--- TITLE: The Saylor’S Complaint; Or, The True Character Of The Purser Of A Ship [item: PG76941-pg76941-124]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 13916-13987
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Of all the curst plagues that e’er Fate did decree
To vex, plague, and punish poor sailors at sea,
There’s none to compare with the purser, that evil
Who’s worse than a jailer, a bum, or a devil,
Sure when he was framed Dame Nature lay dying;
Hell then took a purge, hell then took a purge,
    and Pluto sh--t him flying.

[VERSE 2]
As his name foully stinks, so his butter rank doth smell,
Both hateful to sailors, scarce good enough for hell:
The nation allows men what’s fitting to eat,
But he, curse attend him, gives to us musty meat;
With bisket that’s mouldy, hard stinking Suffolk cheese,
And pork cut in pounds, and pork cut in pounds,
    for to eat with our pease.

[VERSE 3]
Because it is cut off the best fatted hogs
He thinks it too good for eternal lowsie dogs.
Then our urine to purge, that the men may piss clear,
Instead of what’s better, his petty-warrant beer
Is by him allowed, which makes us complain;
Which he ne’er regards, which he ne’er regards,
    so he gets but the gain.
His oatmeal, or grout, known by the name burgooe,
Is fitting for nothing but make a sailor spew:
His bruis, no better than common kitchen-grease,
The sailors are forced to eat with their pease:
Such beef-fat, so nasty, we constantly use,
That’s but fit for the mast, that’s but fit for the mast,
    or the greasing of shoes.

[VERSE 4]
When a sailor’s oblig’d to make use of his store
He then must expect to be miserable poor:
For consider what price for their goods we do pay;
He has treble worth of each man, I dare say.
Such dealings as these are not just, I am sure;
Yet such hardships as these, yet such hardships as these
    we do daily endure.

[VERSE 5]
Now, since he’s so friendly, I’d give, as ’tis due,
By way of requital, a kind wish, or two:
And first, may his brandy run all o’er the deck,
And he end his days in a rope with aking neck;
Or may he still eat, and be never satisfy’d,
Still craving of more, still craving of more,
    but be never cloy’d.

[VERSE 6]
And may he have nothing to drink all the year,
When droughth shall attend him, but petty-warrant beer:
May fate ne’er allow him a candle to his cabbin,
And be in the dark by Old Nick taken napping,
And by him or his agents be bore swiftly away,
To plague, vex, and punish, to plague, vex, and punish,
    for ever and aye.

[VERSE 7]
May Charon be careful and ferry him o’re
To Pluto’s grand court on the Stygian shore:
May ten thousand furies still on him attend,
To plague and torment him unto the world’s end:
While each jolly sailor, to make themselves merry,
Shall take a full glass, shall take a full glass,
    to his passage o’er the ferry.

--- TITLE: The Sailor’S Resolution To Fight The Spaniards [item: PG76941-pg76941-125]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 13988-14022
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
What ship, honest brother sailor? You must stop and let us know.
If you’re entered or protected, you must tell before you go.
Here’s our warrants to impress you. Ne’er repine, my noble blood;
We don’t mean for to oppress you; it’s for your king and country’s
    good.

[VERSE 2]
For to humble the proud Spaniards British courage must be shown,
Or those haughty proud villains will never know what is their own.
Their men-of-war we’ll make to rattle; Spain shall tremble at the
    sight;
Haste, brave boys, away to battle; the French nor they could never
    fight.

[VERSE 3]
British courage should never be daunted at the talk of Spanish
    wars;
While that seamen they are wanted we’ll freely enter, like jolly
    tars.
For to humble the proud Spaniards we’ll sail along so brave and true,
And make the Spaniards to knock under and the French cry out,
    ‘Morbleu.’

[VERSE 4]
So come along, my jolly sailors, enter along with tars so true;
We are the men that fear no dangers, but soon will make the Spaniards
    rue.
Success to all our brave commanders that do plough the raging main,
Likewise to our jolly sailors, for to conquer France and Spain.

--- TITLE: Jack Tar [item: PG76941-pg76941-126]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 14023-14055
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
‘Come, brave, honest Jack Tar, once more will you venture?
Press warrants they are out; I would have you to enter.
Take some rich Spanish prize, as we’ve done before, O.’
‘Yes, and be cheated of them all, as we were the last war, O.’
‘No man that sails with me shall e’er be abused;
So, Jack, come and enter; you shall be well used.
You shall be boatswain’s mate, Jack; so boldly come and enter
And not like a dog be haul’d on board of the tender.’

[VERSE 2]
‘Dear captain,’ he said then, ‘don’t talk of your pressing;
It’s not long ago since I gave six of them a dressing.’
‘I know that very well, Jack: the truth I must grant you;
You are a brave, hearty fellow, and that makes me want you.
‘Dear captain,’ he said then, ‘if the truth I do tell you,
I got so much the last war that it quite fill’d my belly;
For your damn’d rogues of officers they use men so cruel
That a man-of-war is worse than hell or the devil.

[VERSE 3]
‘There is the master a-swearing, the boatswain a-growling,
The midshipman a-howling out, “Take that fore-bowling”;
If you speak but one word you’re a mutinous rascal,
Both your legs laid in irons and try’d by a court-martial.’
Now, boys, we are press’d away from our habitation,
And we leave wife and children in grief and vexation;
We venture our sweet lives in defence of our nation,
And we get nothing for it but toil and vexation.’

--- TITLE: The Jolly Sailor’S True Description Of A Man-Of-War [item: PG76941-pg76941-127]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 14056-14203
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
When first on board of a man-of-war
We go, whether by press or enter,
And alongside of our ship we come,
We boldly in her venture.
Such twigging then at we fresh men.
‘They’re clever fellows,’ some say,
While the buffers stand with their rattans,
Crying, ‘Keep down out of the gangway.’

[VERSE 2]
Then aft upon the quarter-deck
We go, it being common;
Our officers examine us, to know
Who and who are seamen;
There’s some are seamen, some are freemen,
Some one thing, some another:
Then we down below on the main deck go,
Boys, after one another.

[VERSE 3]
Next to old Trinculo we go
For an order to get our hammocks,
Then aft again and down amain,
Not forgetting our stomachs.
The steward pens, he takes our names,
And tells us to our messes;
But nipping there they can’t forbear,
For the Devil them possesses.

[VERSE 4]
Then up again upon the deck,
So briskly, boys, we bundle;
Since we have secur’d our pack,
We have no cause to grumble.
Then we clap on what we heave upon,
Some piping, others singing:
There’s hoist away, likewise belay.
Thus we make a beginning.

[VERSE 5]
When once our ship has got all in,
And nothing now neglected,
To think of sea we do begin,
Our orders soon expected.
Then with a career we get all clear,
In readiness for unmooring,
Boats alongside with wind and tide
To carry the women ashore in.

[VERSE 6]
‘All hands, unmoor,’ the boatswain calls,
And he pipes at every hatchway;
If you Tom Cockswain’s traverse tip him
Take care he don’t catch you;
For without a doubt, if he finds you out,
You may be sure within you,
Over face and eyes, to your surprise
He’ll arm you without mercy.

[VERSE 7]
The capstan is already mann’d.
Shall we hear the boatswain hollow?
Sometimes he is listening at a stand
To hear the answers follow.
We have not brought to, there’s such ado,
While some are calling the swabbers.
Now heave away without delay,
Boys, hold on the nippers.

[VERSE 8]
The boatswain and his mates are piping,
Crying, ‘Men, have a rally,’
And often forward they are piking
To have a rout in the galley.
‘What are you about? Away with us out.’
To leave our victuals we abhor it;
With cuffs and knocks leave kettles and pots,
And the Devil cuff them for it.

[VERSE 9]
‘Heave and in sight, men, heave away,’
From forward the boatswain is calling;
‘Heave a turn or two without delay;
Stand by the capstan for pealing.’
Then one and all to the catt do fall;
We haul both strong and able,
Till presently from forward they cry,
‘Below, stick out the cable.’

[VERSE 10]
We cast our anchors then with speed,
And nimbly press the stoppers,
Then next to fish it we proceed,
Our shank-painter so proper,
Which we do pass securely fast,
And lap well on a seizing,
Our anchors, be sure, can’t be too secure;
It stands to sense and reason.

[VERSE 11]
When once our ship she is unmoor’d
Our swelling sails so neatly,
With fore-tack and main-tack also,
Our sheets haul’d aft completely,
Then away we sail with a fresh gale,
On a voyage or on a station.
Like English hearts we’ll play our parts
In defence of the English nation.

[VERSE 12]
The best cry we like to hear
On board, as I’m a sinner,
Is when from the quarter-deck they call
To the boatswain to pipe to dinner.
Such crowding then among the men:
Some grumble, others jangle;
You’re nobody there without you swear
And boldly stand the wrangle.
There’s green-horn fellows some on board
Before ne’er saw salt water;
When come to sea, upon my word,
The case with them does alter.
They better know how to follow the plow,
With good fat bacon and cabbage;
When sea-sick took like death they look,
Ready to bring up guts and garbage.

[VERSE 13]
When stormy winds begin to blow
Our ship is in great motion;
To carry our victuals safe down below
It requires a good notion.
We often fall down the hatchway with all,
From the top to the bottom sprawling;
Such laughing then among the men,
And loudly the butcher calling.

[VERSE 14]
There are snotty boys of midshipmen
Han’t done yet shitting yellow;
As to their age, some hardly ten
Strike many a brave fellow,
Who dare not prate at any rate,
Nor seem in the least to mumble;
They’ll frap you still, do what you will;
It is but a folly to grumble.
Now to conclude and make an end
In a full flowing brimmer;
Let every one drink to his friend;
The bowl it seems to look thinner.
We’ll drink again, like sons of men,
And drink bad luck to the purser;
He cheats us with ease of our oatmeal and pease:
Such rogues there can’t be worser.

--- TITLE: New Sea Song [item: PG76941-pg76941-128]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 14204-14254
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Our boatswain calls out for his bold British heroes;
Come, listen awhile to what I do sing;
Let every man toss off his full bumper
And drink a good health unto George our King,
And drink a good health to Suke, Moll, and Kitty;
With mirth and good liquor we’ll lead merry lives;
We will not be afraid to kiss, or to venture,
On Saturday night, to our sweethearts and wives.

[VERSE 2]
Our ship she is in harbour, brought safe to an anchor;
The boats are alongside, they begin for to throng;
The girls that are in them, they are crying for husbands;
The one sings out ‘Jemmy,’ the other calls ‘John,’
Whilst the other bawls out, ‘Where is my dear Harry?
If I do not see him, may I never thrive!’
Alongside of those girls you may lie, but not marry,
On Saturday night, to our sweethearts and wives.

[VERSE 3]
Our ship she is unrigged, all ready for docking;
Straightway on board of those hulks we repair,
Where we work hard all day, and at night go a-kissing.
Jack Tar is safe moor’d in the arms of his dear.
Straightway to the town of Venus we will venture
Our spirits to freshen, our bodies to thrive;
We will not be afraid to kiss, nor yet venture
On Saturday night to our sweethearts and wives.

[VERSE 4]
Our ship she is all rigg’d and ready for sea, boys;
The girls that’s on board they begin to look blue;
The boats are alongside to take them on shore, boys;
Says one to the other, ‘Girls, what shall we do?’
Then we put to sea, with a fresh-blowing breeze, boys,
And through the foaming white billows do roar;
We paid off all debts with the flying fore-topsail.
Bid adieu to these girls and the rogues on the shore.

[VERSE 5]
Now we are on the seas, like bold hearts of thunder;
Now we are on the seas we will rant and roar;
We will make all the French and the Spaniards knock under
When our two-and-thirties begin for to roar.
For to handle their dollars my fingers are itching;
If I don’t be at them may I never thrive;
We will not be like misers, to hoard by our riches,
But we will spend them on shore with our sweethearts and wives.

--- TITLE: The Humours Of The Royal Billy [item: PG76941-pg76941-129]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 14255-14359
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come, all ye young fellows, attend to my song;
It will make you to smile, tho’ tis not very long.
I will tell you the truth, how I first went to sea,
And what there befel, if you’ll listen to me:
My story will please you, if right understood,
And you surely will laugh at poor Robin Hood.

[VERSE 2]
’Twas late from the smoke of the chimney I came
On board of a guard-ship, the Royal Billy by name,
Where the first thing I heard when I came alongside,
‘Here’s a grasshopper coming,’ a hoarse fellow cry’d.
The windows were crowded, I thought, by the rood,
They’d have laughed till they cry’d at poor Robin Hood.

[VERSE 3]
I crawl’d up the side till I came to the top,
When a fellow came to me, catch’d hold of my frock.
He ask’d me to step to his house down below.
Much kindness unto me I thought he did show;
But soon to my cost all his kindness was prov’d,
And I curst all such friendship for poor Robin Hood,

[VERSE 4]
His house on the one side was made of a sack,
On the other a blanket near the colour of black.
No sooner this place I did enter in
Than another sings out, ‘Damme, Jack, dowse the glim!’
They rifled my pockets of all that was good,
Then tore off my frock, so left poor Robin Hood.

[VERSE 5]
Then to an old fellow I did straightway repair,
To ask him the place where the constables were.
Up two pair of stairs with him I stept quick,
When he shewed me a man with a whistle and stick.
I told him my story, but that was no good,
For he told me I ly’d, and left poor Robin Hood.

[VERSE 6]
I sat down on the deck to bemoan for a while,
When a woman came to me, and began for to smile.
She ask’d me my name, which soon I did tell,
Also the disaster that had me befel.
The best of ill language at them she did fling,
Then ask’d me below, to accept of some gin.

[VERSE 7]
Then with her I consented directly to go,
And straightway together we went down below,
Where she call’d for a bottle of old English gin.
I blest my good stars with such friend to fall in:
But, to my vexation, I soon understood
There was no one to pay it but poor Robin Hood.

[VERSE 8]
My shirt they stript off, the gin for to pay;
My hat and my shoes both went the same way.
I bawled out, ‘Murder!’ But that was their fun.
I up a long ladder was forced to run
To the officers then, in a terrible mood,
Who all bursted with laughter at poor Robin Hood.

[VERSE 9]
They sent for a man who’d the look of a prig,
And he took me away for the purser to rig.
A huge pair of breeches he gave me, ’tis true,
That reach’d from the top of my rump to my shoe.
A coat he next gave me, too short by a rood;
’Twould not cover the backside of poor Robin Hood.
The next thing I met was a man with a stick,
Who bawl’d out, ‘All hands!’ and then gave me a lick.
‘You lubberly rascal! ’Tis what brought you here!
Scud quick, or I’ll make you, and hoist up the beer.’
I gave him a look, which he well understood,
For he bang’d me till tired, and so left Robin Hood.

[VERSE 10]
No sooner had we done hoisting of beer,
To a place call’d the galley I did straightway repair.
Such a racket and uproar, and hell of a rout,
Scaldings here, scaldings there. I was glad to creep out.
You could not have thought they behaved so rude,
For they scalded the shins of poor Robin Hood.

[VERSE 11]
I next down below to my dinner was brought,
To eat peas with my messmates like pigs in a trough;
But as for the pork, I thought not amiss
While one turn’d his back, crying, ‘Who shall have this?’
I thought it was fair, but I soon understood
The smallest of all fell to poor Robin Hood.
Then a man came unto me with a stick in his hand;
The boatswain he was call’d, if I right understand.
A bucket of grease in my fist he gave fast;
He told me to jump up and grease down the mast.
I scamper’d away then as fast as I could,
But he brought me up standing, ah! poor Robin Hood!

[VERSE 12]
Two ruffians he ordered to strap me amain.
I wish’d myself back with my Jenny again.
My blood it did boil; I was forc’d to obey:
But I show’d them a specimen of West Country play.
Down the hatchway I bundled one rascal so lewd,
But they seiz’d me behind, ah! poor Robin Hood!

[VERSE 13]
When peace is concluded--’twill soon be the news--
I shall see these rapscallions a-blacking of shoes.
With my cudgel of oak I will learn them to skip,
And make them remember on board the guard-ship.
My song it is ended. If right understood,
’Twas from Sussex I came, and my name’s Robin Hood.

--- TITLE: The Dolphin’S Return [item: PG76941-pg76941-130]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 14360-14429
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Ye bold British tars, who to glory are free,
Who dare venture your lives for your fortunes at sea,
Yourself for a while of your pleasures disrobe,
And attend to a tale of a voyage round the globe,
For the Dolphin’s return’d, and such tidings does bring
As may welcome us home to our country and king.
The twenty’th of August, the year sixty-six,
By command of our captain the signal we fix;
In the Sound of old Plymouth our ship we unmoor’d
With our consort the Swallow, and transport well stor’d;
But now we’re return’d, and such tidings we bring
As may welcome us home to our country and king.

[VERSE 2]
The wind being far the next day we set sail,
Blest at once with a fresh and prosperous gale;
And straightway our course for Madeira we steer’d.
No danger we saw, and no hardship we fear’d;
For we sail’d round the world such tidings to bring
As might welcome us home to our country and king.

[VERSE 3]
We touch’d at Madeira, St. Jago likewise,
For the sake of fresh water and other supplies;
But at neither of these could we make any stay,
For the course of our voyage would admit no delay.
We were bound round the world such tidings to bring
As might welcome us home to our country and king.
When Magellan’s Straits we first enter’d we found
Such giants of men that in all the world round
None with them could compare or for size or for height,
For the smallest of these were from six feet to eight.
Yet these are but trifles of tidings to bring;
We’ve a present more worthy our country and king.

[VERSE 4]
In Port Famine we anchor’d, and took in our store
Of both water and wood, for it yielded no more.
Discharging our store ship, our anchors we weigh’d,
And we work’d through the Straits; no time we delay’d;
But now are return’d, and such tidings we bring
As may welcome us home to our country and king.

[VERSE 5]
A tedious long passage it was for to go,
With our consort so dull that we took her in tow,
But on April the 12th we got clear of the Straits;
Tho’ the Swallow, we fear, a much longer time waits,
Yet we are return’d, and such tidings we bring
As may welcome us home to our country and king.
Then we plow’d the South Ocean, such land to discover
As amongst other nations has made such a pother.
We found it, my boys, and with joy be it told,
For beauty such islands you ne’er did behold.
We’ve the pleasure ourselves the tidings to bring
As may welcome us home to our country and king.

[VERSE 6]
For wood, water, fruit, and provision well stor’d
Such an isle as King George’s the world can’t afford,
For to each of these islands great Wallis gave name,
Which will e’er be recorded in annals of fame.
We’d the fortune to find them, and homeward to bring
The tidings a tribute to country and king.

--- TITLE: The Brags Of Washington [item: PG76941-pg76941-131]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 14430-14463
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come, all you brave seamen and landsmen likewise,
That have got an inclination your fortunes to rise,
That have got an inclination to fight the proud Bostonians,
And soon we’ll let you know that we are the sons of Britain.
                                            Fal lal, etc.
As for the brags of Washington, that never can be;
There is Carlton and Clinton have shewn their bravery;
There is Darby and Rodney, commanders of the ocean,
And many a brave fellow is waiting for promotion.

[VERSE 2]
And if we meet a privateer, or a lofty man of war,
We never stand to wrangle, to jangle, or to jar;
We give them a broadside, and say, ‘My lads, take care, O,
And keep your proper distance from an English man-of-war, O.’
And if they will not fight us, but from us run away,
All with our heavy chain-shot we’ll cut their masts away,
And if they will not yield to us, nor unto us surrender,
We’ll split their ship in pieces and to the bottom send her.

[VERSE 3]
As for the brags of Washington, we care not a pin;
We will fire at his breastworks and make him let us in;
Our bomb-shells and cannons shall roar like mighty thunder,
And by our constant firing we will make them to surrender.
And when the wars are over, if fortune saves our lives,
We will bring great store of riches to our sweethearts and our wives,
And drink a health unto the lad that has a heart to enter;
That man can never gain a prize that is afraid to venture.

--- TITLE: On The Late Engagement In Charles Town River [item: PG76941-pg76941-132]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 14464-14510
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Good people of Old England, come, listen unto me,
All you who live at home at ease, and from all dangers free,
What I’m a-going to mention, and to you shall declare,
Concerning part of our fleet as they a-cruising were.

[VERSE 2]
It is of a late action, as for a truth we hear,
As part of our British fleet for Charles Town they did steer;
As we the river sailed along the provincials they begun;
The Bristol, most unfortunate, she on the bar did run.

[VERSE 3]
Then from the town and batteries they fired on us amain
With red-hot shot all from the shore, on board of us they came;
And seeing us lie on the bar, their intentions was so,
Our gallant ship for to blow up and prove our overthrow.

[VERSE 4]
But thro’ God’s Providence so great prevented their desire,
Tho’ with their shot, that came so hot, they set us twice on fire;
But soon we out the flames did put, our gallant seamen brave
They did their best endeavours their precious lives to save.

[VERSE 5]
The gallant Bristol well behaved, tho’ she was in distress,
And all the ships in company kept firing in excess.
Our cannons briskly we discharged, our shot like hail did pour,
Amongst the blacks and Indians so numerous on the shore.

[VERSE 6]
We drove them from their batteries, and made them to retreat,
Likewise the town soon shattered with our gallant fleet;
We gave them a warm reception, and that they knew so well,
Because against Old England great they strongly did rebel.

[VERSE 7]
We engaged many hours, for the best part of the day;
Our brave commander he was kill’d all in the bloody fray;
Two hundred more brave men were kill’d, th’ engagement prov’d so
    sore,
Upon the decks, poor souls, they lay, all in their purple gore.

[VERSE 8]
Now to conclude and make an end, Lord, send it was all o’er,
In love and unity to live as we have done before;
Success unto all Britons bold, that’s both by land or sea,
Who now is venturing their lives in North America.

--- TITLE: Sullivan’S Island [item: PG76941-pg76941-133]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 14511-14560
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
My lords, with your leave
    An account will I give
That deserves to be written in metre:
    For the rebels and I
    Have been pretty nigh--
Faith, almost too much for Sir Peter.

[VERSE 2]
    With much labour and toil
    Unto Sullivan’s Isle
I came, firm as Falstaff or Pistol,
    But the Yankees (’od rot ’em,
    I could not get at ’em)
Most terribly maul’d my poor Bristol.

[VERSE 3]
    Bold Clinton by land
    Did quietly stand
While I made a thundering clatter;
    But the channel was deep,
    So he only could peep
And not venture over the water.

[VERSE 4]
    De’el take ’em; their shot
    Came so swift and so hot,
And the cowardly dogs stood so stiff, sirs,
    That I put ship about,
    And was glad to get out,
Or they would not have left me a skiff, sirs.
    Now bold as a Turk
    I proceed to New York,
Where with Clinton and Howe you may find me.
    I’ve the wind in my tail,
    And am hoisting my sail,
To leave Sullivan’s Island behind me.

[VERSE 5]
    But, my lords, do not fear,
    For before the next year,
Although a small island could fret us,
    The continent whole
    We shall take, by my soul,
If the cowardly Yankees will let us.

--- TITLE: The Cruisers [item: PG76941-pg76941-134]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 14561-14582
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

# APPARATUS: A NEW SONG, ADAPTED TO THE TIMES.

[VERSE 1]
Behold, upon the swelling wave, with streaming pendants gay,
Our gallant ship invites the brave, while glory leads the way.
    And a-cruising we will go, oho! oho! oho!
    A-cruising we will go, oho! and a-cruising we will go!

[VERSE 2]
Ye beauteous maids, your smiles bestow; for if you prove unkind
How can we hope to beat the foe? We leave our hearts behind.
    When a-cruising we shall go, oho! oho! oho! etc.

[VERSE 3]
See Keppel’s flag once more display’d; upon the deck he stands;
Old England’s glory ne’er can fade or tarnish in his hands.
    So a-cruising we will go, etc.

[VERSE 4]
Be England to herself but true, to France defiance hurl’d,
Give peace, America, with you, and war with all the world.
    And a-cruising we will go, etc.

--- TITLE: On Board Of The ‘Arethusa [item: PG76941-pg76941-135]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 14583-14636
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come, all ye jolly sailors bold,
Whose hearts are cast in honour’s mould,
While British glory I unfold
    Huzza to the Arethusa!
She is a frigate tight and brave
As ever stemm’d the dashing wave:
    Her men are staunch
    To their fav’rite launch;
And when the foe shall meet our fire,
Sooner than strike we’ll all expire
    On board of the Arethusa.

[VERSE 2]
’Twas with the spring fleet she went out,
The English Channel to cruize about,
When four French sail, in show so stout,
    Bore down on the Arethusa.
The fam’d Belle Poule straight ahead did lie:
The Arethusa seem’d to fly;
    Not a sheet nor a tack
    Or a brace did she slack,
Tho’ the Frenchmen laugh’d, and thought it stuff,
But they knew not the handful of men how tough
    On board of the Arethusa.

[VERSE 3]
On deck five hundred men did dance,
The stoutest they could find in France;
We with two hundred did advance,
    On board of the Arethusa.
Our captain hail’d the Frenchman, ‘Ho!’
The Frenchman then cried out, ‘Hallo!’
    ‘Bear down; d’ye see?
    To our admiral’s lee.’
‘No, no,’ says the Frenchman, ‘that can’t be.’
‘Then I must lug you along with me,’
    Says the saucy Arethusa.

[VERSE 4]
The fight was off the Frenchman’s land.
We forc’d them back upon the strand;
For we fought till not a stick would stand
    Of the gallant Arethusa.
And, now we have driven the foe ashore,
Never to fight with Britons more,
    Let each fill a glass
    To his favourite lass;
A health to the captain and officers true
And all that belong to the jovial crew
    On board of the Arethusa.

--- TITLE: The Greenland Men [item: PG76941-pg76941-136]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 14637-14769
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
On board the noble Ann, 27th. of March, from Shields to Greenland
    we set sail,
The wind it blowing fair with a sweet and pleasant gale.
We had not sailed many days when Fair Isle we did see,
But on the next day morning in with a privateer fell we,
  We’ll go, etc.

[VERSE 2]
She bore down upon us, and upon our quarter she did come;
She hoisted French colours and to windward fired a gun;
This greatly did surprize us, and to quarters we did go.
It never shall be said, my boys, but the noble Ann will face the
    foe.
  We’ll go, etc.

[VERSE 3]
All hands being at quarters to work we did begin;
The first broadside she gave us down our topsailyards did come.
Our captain call’d, ‘Don’t be afraid, but fight away, like men;
It never shall be said, my boys, that we will run from them.’
  We’ll go, etc.

[VERSE 4]
Our guns being few in number, the number being but five,
To fire them it is needless till we can him espy.
He play’d upon our bow and quarter; the shot it came like hail:
To get our guns to bear upon him made us both curse and rail.
  We’ll go, etc.

[VERSE 5]
Our guns set for the best advantage alongside they did come.
We said we need not fire till execution could be done;
As soon as they bore upon him we immediately let drive,
And wounded three of his Irishmen. ’Tis a pity we left them alive.
  We’ll go, etc.

[VERSE 6]
Our captain walked the quarterdeck like a lion stout,
Cry’d, ‘Don’t let it be said, my boys, we cowardly give it out.’
Our running ropes, sails, and rigging being all shot away,
Our ship in this condition could neither wear nor stay.
  We’ll go, etc.

[VERSE 7]
We fought them five glasses, but found it all in vain;
You see she carries 18 guns and we’re sure for to be taken;
Our captain cry’d, ‘What must we do? To strike it will be best;
The cutter never will leave us until they see us lost.’
  We’ll go, etc.

[VERSE 8]
Then seeing us an inferior force they unto us did shout,
Saying, ‘You poor English dogs, why don’t you give it out?’
We found it was in vain to fight; down colours we did hawl;
‘Hoist out your boat and come aboard’ unto us, they did call.
  We’ll go, etc.

[VERSE 9]
O then our captain went aboard, and part of our noble crew.
They beat the captain on the head and swore they would run him
    through;
Now into their hold they put us, bound into irons strong,
And for twelve days they kept us where we were thick and throng.
  We’ll go, etc.

[VERSE 10]
The first meal that they gave us was calavances and salt beef,
Which made us curse fortune and wish for some relief;
We lying in this condition, for Ireland Captain Ray in did push
Unto the Irish Channel, where he was bound to cruise.
  We’ll go, etc.

[VERSE 11]
They had not cruised many days, but only four or five,
Until they spied the Friends brig and soon made her a prize;
But cruising two days longer in breast of Boron Head,
Which proved to our advantage, they took the Jenny brig.
  We’ll go, etc.

[VERSE 12]
Ransom being made for her, it being all agreed
For to knock off our irons and put us aboard with speed,
We’re now on board the Jenny. To Glasgow she is bound,
And to secure us from the press we landed in a Highland sound.
  We’ll go, etc..

[VERSE 13]
Now to our joy and comfort we’re landed all on shore,
And to Newcastle we are bound, to see our friends once more.
But travelling thro’ the Highlands, the people, very poor,
They scarce would admit us to come within their door.
  We’ll go, etc.

[VERSE 14]
We being in this condition we travelled long and sore,
But as we came to the southward more pity they did show,
At last meeting with one John Robson, who proved very kind,
And for three days he kept us and maintained us like a friend.
  We’ll go, etc.

[VERSE 15]
After this refreshment on our journey we do proceed,
But coming near to Edinburgh we met a rogue indeed,
Who pretended to be our friend, but with an evil eye,
For then he did deceive us, as we in the barns did lie.
  We’ll go, etc.

[VERSE 16]
Next morning after two o’clock 50 of Neper’s gang
Came with sword and pistol to take 10 naked men.
They finding us able seamen, as we knew very well,
They gave us such an offer as is a shame to tell.
  We’ll go, etc.

[VERSE 17]
Now we are all taken, and to Leith we do come
Before Captain Neper to receive our doom.
We were that night in two barns as we were ne’er before,
Or we had broke some of these ruffians’ heads and made them for to
    roar.
  We’ll go, etc.
He told us we might enter if that we would pay
Forty shillings a man to the rogue that did us betray;
But Neper’s high offer we rejected with disdain,
But we’ll fight for our King against France and against Spain.
  We’ll go, etc.

[VERSE 18]
But I hope in short time sweet peace will be restor’d,
And the Devil will have Neper tho’ we’re in the hold.
When peace is restor’d to Leith we will come,
To pay Neper and his men for what they have done.
  We’ll go, etc.
Come, all you jolly seamen that to Greenland do go,
We wish you good success, alltho’ we go no more,
For we are forced to serve the King on board of a man-o-war;
But expects to return with gold and silver store.
  We’ll go, etc.

--- TITLE: Admiral Keppel Triumphant; Or, Monsieurs In The Suds [item: PG76941-pg76941-137]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 14770-14817
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Each bold British tar,
  Who ne’er dreads wound or scar,
Now to honour and glory advance;
  Never let it be told
  That Britons so bold
Shall stoop to be conquer’d by France.

[VERSE 2]
  This American war
  Had ne’er gone on so far
Had they not been supported by France;
  But Keppel so brave,
  Such music he’ll have,
Will teach them the Old English dance.

[VERSE 3]
  Tho’ railing there’s been
  ’Gainst statesmen and King
And they said, we durst not declare war,
  But, whether or not,
  Such a navy we’ve got
That will soon be a scourge to Monsieur.

[VERSE 4]
  Bold Keppel, we know,
  Was ever their foe,
And his courage no Briton need doubt;
  Two French frigates he’s ta’en,
  That were sailing the main
Our West India fleet for to rout.

[VERSE 5]
  Now Keppel, they say,
  Off Brest Harbour does lay:
Monsieurs with their fleet can’t come out;
  If they do they must fight,
  Which was ne’er their delight.
We shall beat them; of that there’s no doubt.

[VERSE 6]
  Each true British soul,
  Push round can or bowl,
Drink success to his Majesty’s arms
  And his navy at sea;
  Then we all must agree
We fear no invading alarms.

--- TITLE: A New Song In Praise Of Admiral Keppel’S Fleet [item: PG76941-pg76941-139]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 14880-14918
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come, all young seamen, wherever you be,
That sails with Admiral Keppel to sea,
For we are the boys that are loyal and true,
That fights for King George and our country too.
    So, boys, fill your bumpers all round;
    Success to the fleet that’s outward-bound,
    For we are the boys that wears true blue
    And belong to Admiral Keppel’s crew.

[VERSE 2]
But when he hoists the British flag,
Not France or Spain has room to brag;
He will fight the French and Spaniards too,
And make Monsieur to cry, ‘Morbleu!’
    So, boys, etc.

[VERSE 3]
Had Keppel but orders for to fight
The French wou’d not have run away at night;
No orders he had for to give them their due,
Which vex’d the admiral and his brave crew.
    So, boys, etc.

[VERSE 4]
I wish their heads on Temple Bar,
Who’d hinder bold fighting in time of war,
Or else, like Jack the Painter, to be
Hanged high upon Tyburn tree.
    So, boys, etc.

[VERSE 5]
Now drink a health to George our King,
Not forgetting Charlotte, his royal Queen,
And all brave seamen that sail on the main
True blue for ever will never stain.
    So, boys, etc.

--- TITLE: Admiral Keppel Triumphant [item: PG76941-pg76941-140]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 14919-14982
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Ye brave British tars, come, attend to my muse,
Be jovial and hearty, in wine let’s carouse;
For Keppel from the accusation is clear,
That was brought against him by Sir Hugh Palliser.

[VERSE 2]
One morning, last July, at break of the day,
The French was descry’d in battle array:
Brave Keppel, impatient to fight proud Monsieur,
Directed his course and unto them drew near.

[VERSE 3]
The French fleet to windward first gave a broadside.
Augustus, undaunted, their great guns defy’d:
His fleet, being mann’d with compleat British tars,
Appal’d the Monsieur with the thunder of Mars.
Aghast the pale French in dismay bore away;
Our ships, being crippl’d, oblig’d us to stay,
Main-sails, gallant royals, stay-sails to repair,
That we might again re-attack the Monsieur.

[VERSE 4]
This done, our commander the signal did make
For the ships to the lee to come to his wake.
Regardless of order, Sir Hugh Palliser
Refus’d to obey, and kept back in the rear.

[VERSE 5]
This gave the French time to retreat into Brest:
But observe the sequel, which is a meer jest.
As guilt is always the companion of fear,
So mind the dark plan of Sir Hugh Palliser.

[VERSE 6]
Assisted by Beelzebub, prince of old Styx,
His infernal sire, the weapon he strikes;
Himself to exculpate, the shaft he lets fly,
Intending a sacrifice Keppel should die.

[VERSE 7]
The plan was laid down, then the charge it was made,
Augustus accused of being afraid
To fight the Monsieurs, and of running away,
And leaving the French fleet triumphant at sea.
But justice and Montague there did preside;
They found out the falsehood, his errors descry’d;
The jury withdrew, for they all saw the cheat,
Acquitted Augustus, because he was great.

[VERSE 8]
This true son of Neptune, couragious and bold,
Will fight for his king, and by him be controul’d;
To minions in power he’ll not be a slave,
The French he’ll chastize with a heart free and brave.

[VERSE 9]
So now, brother sailors, let us reunite
To serve under Keppel, the French for to fight;
His name, like the gold from the furnace, shall shine
In Old England’s annals to time’s latest line.

[VERSE 10]
Then fill up your glasses, and let them not stand;
A health to the hero that doth us command:
May each British heart and voice say, without fear,
‘A fig for the French and Sir Hugh Palliser!’

--- TITLE: Keppel For Ever! [item: PG76941-pg76941-141]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 14983-15023
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Smile, smile, Britannia, smile, on Admiral Keppel smile,
                   Thy darling son;
With laurels crown his head; go, Fame, his glory spread;
His name monsieurs do dread, from him they run.

[VERSE 2]
Goree, th’ Havannah too, where shot in showers flew,
                   Keppel so bold,
In the midst of the fray, he to his men did say,
‘We’ll shew them British play and share their gold.’

[VERSE 3]
Tho’ he’s been false-accused, his character abus’d,
                   Still he’s the thing;
Keppel these forty years has serv’d in the wars,
Fear’d neither wounds nor scars, for George his king.

[VERSE 4]
But Twitcher and his crew (I mean his dupe Sir Hugh),
                   Wicked their scheme!
To try Keppel did call, thro’ malice, that was all.
Lucifer’s pride must fall, like Admiral Byng.

[VERSE 5]
Bonfires, bells did ring; Keppel was all the ding,
                   Music did play;
Windows with candles in, all for to honour him;
People aloud did sing, ‘Keppel! huzza!’

[VERSE 6]
May he draw his sword again in defence of George his king
                   And country’s right.
On board the Victory, again his flag does fly.
Monsieurs will feel, by-and-by, if he will fight.

[VERSE 7]
Go, go, thou base Sir Hugh, vice-admiral of the blue,
                   Prythee be still!
Ah! what a wicked dog, to splice the very log!
Give him, instead of grog, a leaden pill!

--- TITLE: A New Song On Admiral Barrington [item: PG76941-pg76941-142]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 15024-15070
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come, all you jolly sailors of courage stout and bold,
Come, listen to these lines; the truth I will unfold.
Jack, ensign, and pennant in the morning we let fly,
We engag’d the French fleet the 6th of July.

[VERSE 2]
Our drums they did beat and to quarters we went,
And for to engage the French fleet it was our intent;
Our guns they being loaded with round and grape shot,
We beat three ports into one on board the Languedoc.
There was Admiral Barrington, Britannia’s delight,
With courage undaunted he boldly did fight;
His rigging being shatter’d, and likewise his sails,
He still kept cannonading on board the Prince of Wales.

[VERSE 3]
We had one floating battery carry’d guns upon three decks
And in the time of action she left her f a legs.
We never back’d our topsails French cannon to shun,
But boldly ran the gantlet with Admiral Barrington.
If Royal George of England will give us the grant
For Admiral Barrington to have the command,
We would conquer the French fleet were they ever so strong,
We’d hoist the British colours on board the Count d’Estaing.

[VERSE 4]
There’s Captain Fitzherbert was valiant in the fight,
And in the Royal Oak he took great delight,
In the loading their guns and discharging so free;
It shew’d that they were loyal to King and country.
Come, my brave boys, this engagement is all o’er,
And when that we return, my boys, we’ll dance, sing, and roar;
This song it shall be with the old and the young:
Long life and success unto Admiral Barrington.

[VERSE 5]
Our sweethearts and wives they are not to be forgot;
The balls they now engage with are softer than French shot.
When e’er we do return, my boys, we’ll make these culls to run,
We’ll make them dread the sailors that fought with Barrington.
Our bowls they are full, and we have plenty for to drink,
And that’s the thing which causes me to drop my pen and ink;
Whene’er we meet the French dogs we’ll make their jackets smoak,
Whilst Captain Fitzherbert commands the Royal Oak.

--- TITLE: Paul Jones [item: PG76941-pg76941-143]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 15071-15110
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
An American frigate, called the Richard by name,
Mounted guns forty-four, out of L’Orient came
For to cruise in the Channel of Old England’s fame,
With a noble commander: Paul Jones was his name.
We had not long cruised before two sails we spied,
A large forty-four and a twenty likewise,
With fifty bright shipping well loaded with store,
And the convoy stood in for the old Yorkshire shore.

[VERSE 2]
At length the proud Pearson came up alongside
With a long speaking trumpet. ‘Whence came you?’ he cried.
Come, answer me quickly--I’ve hailed you before--
Or else a broadside into you I will pour.’

[VERSE 3]
Paul Jones he then smiled and to his men did say,
‘Let every man stand to the best of his play.’
We received the broadside from the proud Englishmen,
But soon our brave Yankees returned it again.

[VERSE 4]
We fought them four glasses, four glasses so hot,
Till 40 bold seamen lay dead on the spot,
And 55 more lay bleeding in gore,
While the thundering large canons of Paul Jones did roar.

[VERSE 5]
Our gunner, being frightened, to Paul Jones he came.
‘Our ship she makes water and is likewise in flame.’
Paul Jones he made answer in the height of his pride,
‘If we can do no better we’ll sink alongside.’

[VERSE 6]
Oh, now, my brave boys, we have taken a prize,
A large forty-four with a twenty likewise,
With twenty fine merchantmen laden with store,
So we’ll alter our course to the American shore.

--- TITLE: Captain Farmer [item: PG76941-pg76941-144]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 15111-15166
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
The muse and the hero together are fir’d,
The same noble views have their bosoms inspir’d;
As freedom they love, and for glory contend,
The muse o’er the hero still mourns as a friend;
His name from the jaws of oblivion to save,
The muse shall immortalize Farmer the brave.

[VERSE 2]
His ship was the Quebec, fatal, glorious name,
The source to Britannia of sorrow and fame.
We’ve twice to our cost that name ill-omen’d found,
But now we’ve no balsam to heal this fresh wound,
For then tho’ Wolfe’s loss to our joy gave a check,
Whilst we morn’d for the chief we rejoic’d for Quebec.
At daybreak, ere Phœbus had shed his blest light,
Three sail he espy’d, and prepar’d for to fight;
October the 6th, anno seventy-nine,
With a forty-gun ship he in battle did join;
At nine in the morning began the fierce fray,
Which without intermission held most of the day.

[VERSE 3]
Five hours and upwards the action did last;
The shrouds were all torn, and they lost every mast;
Tho’ thicker than hail the dread bullets did fly
Yet still to his men gallant Farmer did cry,
‘Fight away, my brave boys; I will spend my last breath
Ere I’ll yield to the foe: give me conquest or death.’

[VERSE 4]
At length the proud foe was constrain’d to retire;
They steer’d to some distance and slackened their fire.
The victory, Hibernia, had then been thy son’s,
But the sails of the Quebec were fir’d by her guns.
Then all was distraction, confusion, despair:
The vessel took fire and blew up in the air.
Thus fell gallant Farmer, the generous and brave;
The Rambler in vain strove his life for to save.
Her long boat she hoist out for to take up the crew,
But the sea rose too high, and too hard the wind blew.
Seventeen she picked up on the waves that did float;
The barbarous enemy fir’d at the boat.

[VERSE 5]
Ye sons of Hibernia, for valour renown’d,
The praises of Farmer, your hero, resound;
His name bright shall shine. Then a truce to all grief;
Vernon, Warren, Tyrrell shall welcome the chief,
And the brave British Cornwall with pleasure shall crown
An Hibernian whose exit resembled his own.

[VERSE 6]
Taught by his great example let’s danger defy;
For the sake of our country let’s conquer or die.
May our navy triumphant ride over the main,
And check the presumption of Gallia and Spain;
And, oh! may some hero rise ere ’tis too late,
Chastise insolent Jones, and revenge Farmer’s fate!

--- TITLE: The Bold Blades Of Old England [item: PG76941-pg76941-145]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 15167-15210
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come, rouse up, my lads, let us haste to the main,
And load home our chests with the dollars of Spain,
For as we have beat them we’ll do so again,
  And it’s, oh! the bold blades of Old England!

[VERSE 2]
They tell us that sixty fine ships of the line
Of France and of Spain in the ocean do shine;
But let them remember the year fifty-nine;
  They were banged by the blades, etc.
Those villains they thought some advantage to take
On America’s land, for to lessen her state;
But they quickly shall know it was all a mistake,
  Convinc’d by the blades, etc.

[VERSE 3]
How proudly they came with a numerous host
To take, sink, and burn, and to land on our coast;
And when they had done nothing went home for to boast
  Afraid of the blades, etc.

[VERSE 4]
Already we have some of their dollars to shew
At Liverpool, Guernsey, and London also,
And took one of their islands, call’d fam’d Omoa.
  Oh! the bold blades, etc.

[VERSE 5]
Brave Rodney and Parker have done the thing well,
And altho’ their admirals made such a swell,
Will soon be sent home the news for to tell;
  They’ve been drub’d by the blades, etc.

[VERSE 6]
Bold Rodney, we hear, is come up with a foe,
Took one man-of-war, and five frigates also,
With about eighteen transports, a very smart blow.
  Oh! the bold blades, etc.
Then come, my true Britons, and fill up the glass
To George and his navy; around let it pass,
And he that won’t pledge it proclaim him an ass;
  And it’s, oh! the bold blades, etc.

--- TITLE: The Royal Sailor [item: PG76941-pg76941-146]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 15211-15249
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
The foes of Old England (France, Holland, and Spain),
Made bold by indulgence, insulted the main;
The flag of defiance together unfurl’d,
And at England, Old England, their vengence they hurl’d:
When Neptune arose from his watry throne;
In a coral red suit he most beautifully shone;
He call’d for his tritons, and bade them repair
To the Court of great George, for young William was there.
‘He’s royal, he’s noble, he’s chosen by me
This isle to protect and reign prince of the sea.’

[VERSE 2]
O’erjoy’d at the message, the youth rear’d his head.
‘I’ll fight like a prince,’ were the words that he said;
‘The cause of my country I’ll boldly espouse;
To the sea I’m wedded, and give her my vows.
With Rodney, with Digby, with Ross I will go,
And die, but I’ll conquer each insolent foe.’
The tritons reported the words that he said,
And Spain heard the plaudits by Neptune then paid:
‘He’s royal, he’s noble, he’s chosen by me
Britain’s isle to protect and reign prince of the sea.’

[VERSE 3]
The Dons they have felt the effects of his rage;
No more with blood royal they’ll dare to engage;
For he stood on the deck with his naked drawn sword,
And by the bold Digby he passed the word.
Humanity touch’d him, tho’ not with base fear,
When one noble ship was blown into the air.
His courage gave rapture to each jolly tar,
Who look on Prince William their bulwark in war.
He’s royal, he’s noble, he’s chosen to be
The guard of this isle and the prince of the sea.

--- TITLE: Hood’S Conquest Over The Count De Grasse [item: PG76941-pg76941-147]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 15250-15322
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come, all you jovial sailors, give ear unto my song;
Let joy inspire your hearts while glory leads you on.
The Count de Grasse with all his fleet has threatened us full sore
That with his great armada he’d scour the British shore,
Our ships he’d sink, our islands take all under his command;
But the courage of bold Britons has stopt his warlike hand.

[VERSE 2]
The proud and lofty hero in Port Royal harbour lay,
And on the eighth of April from thence he sail’d away,
And with his floating batteries, in all just thirty-three,
A large convoy of transports to bear him company;
With troops and ammunition, as plainly does appear,
For to besiege Jamaica his course he strait did steer.
He thought this great attempt was very bold indeed,
But now I will unfold to you how far he did succeed.

[VERSE 3]
For Hood soon had tidings the birds had took their flight
That he with so much diligence had watch’d both day and night;
Then with the gallant British fleet we sail’d from St. Lucia,
Resolving the destruction of the daring enemy.
It was on the ninth of April, just at the break of day,
We spy’d these lofty Frenchmen at Dominica lay.
There being but little wind, and they to windward were,
In spite of our best efforts their convoy did get clear.

[VERSE 4]
The squadron under gallant Hood receiv’d a gallant breeze,
To bring the French to action the present moment seiz’d;
The whole French fleet we did engage full eight glasses or more,
And with our little squadron we well paid their score;
And like undaunted Britons each man stood to his gun,
Altho’ the French at times were nearly two to one.
The rest of our fleet coming up, on them began to play,
Which made them to haul their wind, like cowards run away.

[VERSE 5]
Those cowards then to windward three days we did pursue,
Until the twelfth of April the glorious fight renew’d;
The wind did seem to favour us, our fleet hove in a line,
And for to close our enemy it was our whole design.
Bold Drake led the van, and fully bent was he
To die or else to conquer the daring enemy.
The action it commenced from the van unto the rear,
And we brake their line of battle amidst the smoke of fire.
Their Glory was dismasted, our shot so well we plied,
While fury round the enemy did rage on every side.

[VERSE 6]
So closely we pursued them they knew not where to run
To shelter their disabled ships from the fire of English guns.
From morning until evening the battle we maintain’d.
The sea on every side of us seem’d to be in a flame.
The lofty City of Paris and haughty Count de Grasse,
The one we took a pris’ner, the other laid avast.
What joy inspir’d each Briton’s heart, when the action it did close,
To see the lilly of France strike to the English rose.
Now the lofty Ville de Paris to Lewis is no more;
Behold, she trims her lofty sails to deck Britannia’s shore,
With three more of their lofty ships to bear her company,
And two, to make the fight compleat, lay buried in the sea.

[VERSE 7]
So now bold Lewis think no more bold Britons to ensnare:
Our English tars will curb your pride; your boasting we don’t fear.
So, Britons, now join chorus and sound our admiral’s praise,
Brave gallant Hood, and Drake, the terror of the seas,
All captains and lieutenants that fought with courage great,
All officers and seamen throughout the British fleet,
For we have and will still beat them; so, Britons bold, advance
To curb the boasting insults of proud and haughty France.

--- TITLE: The Loss Of The Centaur [item: PG76941-pg76941-148]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 15323-15368
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Ye landsmen all, I pray attend, who live at home at ease,
To these lines that I’ve penn’d upon the dangers of the seas;
Likewise the loss of the Centaur, a gallant man-of-war,
Britons, weep, in the deep lies many a gallant tar.

[VERSE 2]
This ship set sail from England, was to the Indies bound,
But at her returning was wind and weather bound;
Such dreadful storms arising, her rigging tore away,
And, alas! all her masts went overboard straightway.

[VERSE 3]
In this dreadful situation she was drove up and down;
Full three weeks she floated; no assistance could be found;
Her guns were all thrown over to lighten her the more:
Night and day they did pray to have a sight of shore.

[VERSE 4]
But, to add to their sorrow, another storm arose,
And to the dreadful seas, poor souls, they were expos’d;
At last they found her sinking; the air was rent with cries,
Dismal sound, she went down, never more to rise.

[VERSE 5]
But as she was sinking two boats were hoisted out,
And some, who got on board them, were sadly tost about;
And one being overloaded, she sunk and went down.
Waves beat high, no ship nigh, so that all on board were drown’d.

[VERSE 6]
The captain and twelve sailors were all who did survive,
And out of several hundreds these few were left alive,
Tho’ they were almost perish’d with hunger and fatigues,
No delay, for night and day they did row many leagues.

[VERSE 7]
Only three days’ provisions, which they made last for nine,
And in this low condition of land could see no sign;
Full sixteen days drove up and down before they reached the land,
Such a sight was a fright, so weak they could not stand.

[VERSE 8]
Ye landsmen, take compassion on those that plough the main,
For the honour of the nation, its rights for to maintain.
How they’re exposed to danger these lines do plainly show;
We implore that no more may such hardships ever know.

--- TITLE: A New Song On The Battle Fought On The 18Th June, 1793 [item: PG76941-pg76941-150]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 15418-15468
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come, all you British heroes, listen to what I say;
’Tis of a noble battle that was fought the other day;
And such a sharp engagement we hardly ever knew:
Our officers were valiant and our sailors so true.

[VERSE 2]
The La Nymphe was our frigate, and she carried a valiant crew,
With thirty-six twelve-pounders, that made the French to rue.
At daylight in the morning the French hove in sight;
Captain Pellew he commanded us in this fight.

[VERSE 3]
Full forty eighteen-pounders we had for to engage;
The French they thought to confound us, they seemed so much enrag’d.
Our captain cry’d, ‘Be steady, boys, and well supply each gun;
We’ll take this haughty Frenchman, or force her for to run.’

[VERSE 4]
The action then began, my boys, with shot on every side;
They thought her weight of metal would soon subdue our pride.
I think the second broadside her captain he was slain,
And many a valiant Frenchman upon the decks were lain.

[VERSE 5]
We fought on with such fury, made every shot to tell,
And thirteen brave seamen in our ship there fell,
Tho’ forty-five minutes was the time this fight did last,
The French ship lost her tiller and likewise her mizen mast.

[VERSE 6]
Then yard arm and yard arm we by each other lay,
And sure such noble courage to each other did display;
We form’d a resolution to give the French a check,
And instantly we boarded her off the quarter-deck.

[VERSE 7]
Her colours being struck, my boys, she then became our prize,
And our young ship’s company subdued our enemies,
Altho’ they were superior in metal and in men.
Of such engagement you may seldom hear again.

[VERSE 8]
And now in Portsmouth Harbour our prize is safely moor’d.
Success to all brave sailors that enter now on board;
A health to Captain Pellew, and all his sailors bold,
Who value more their honour than misers do their gold.

--- TITLE: The Downfall Of The French Fleet [item: PG76941-pg76941-151]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 15469-15525
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
The 28th of May the French fleet hove in sight.
Lord Howe he made a signal; resolv’d he was to fight.
Then his ships in a line he drew,
And cannon balls straight at them flew,
Resolv’d the French dogs to subdue,
      Like brave British boys.
On the 29th again our ships in line we drew;
Resolv’d was each man the action to renew.
Admiral Gardiner then the line he broke,
Which in our favour spoke,
Crying, ‘Monsieur, we will make you smoke,
      Like true British boys.’

[VERSE 2]
At last the glorious day, call’d the first of June--
So well I do remember, it was about noon--
We to windward of them lay,
And down to them we bore away,
Resolv’d our courage to display,
      Like brave British boys.

[VERSE 3]
And then the bold Brunswick for honour she did try,
Alongside the Vengeur two hours she did lie,
Brave Captain Harvey he did cry,
‘My lads, we have orders to comply;
We’ll make her strike or else we’ll die
      Like brave Brunswick boys.’

[VERSE 4]
Our officers and our ship’s crew so well did play their part
Nine shot from our guns in her copper we did dart,
Till down her colours she did haul,
And to be boarded aloud did bawl,
Crying out, ‘Monsieur, we’ll sink you all,’
      Say the brave Brunswick boys.

[VERSE 5]
Another on our larboard side to board us she came,
And to put us all to death, the America by name;
But with our skill we all did try,
And three broadsides at her let fly,
And her three masts on board did lie,
      By the brave Brunswick boys.

[VERSE 6]
Success to Lord Howe, and all his noble fleet;
Such a set of fighting fellows together ne’er did meet.
May they together still remain,
And brave Lord Howe still rule the main
For to subdue Monsieur again,
      Like brave British boys.

[VERSE 7]
Success to King George, likewise our royal Queen,
And may they be happy throughout their glorious reign,
And may God forget them quite,
That will not go and fight,
For to maintain great George’s right,
      Like brave British boys.

--- TITLE: A New Song On The Sea Engagement Fought The First Of June Last [item: PG76941-pg76941-152]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 15526-15593
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come, all ye British hearts of gold,
A glorious tale I will unfold
Of Howe, who fought the French so bold,
  On board the Queen Charlotte.
On June the first this fight began:
Our admiral he led the van;
Our shot did play so hot that day
The French they try’d to run away,
  But Howe took care they should not.

[VERSE 2]
The Charlotte, with Lord Howe therein,
This fierce encounter did begin,
And bravely threw her broadside in
  Against the French commander,
Who found it so hot that day
That no longer there could stay,
But, crouding sail, he bore away;
  He was no salamander.

[VERSE 3]
They left us seven ships that day,
So crippl’d, could not get away;
Like logs they on the sea did lay,
  So hot was their reception.
Two of them carried eighty guns,
Five seventy-fours were noble ones.
Huzza! huzza! their admiral runs;
  He could get no redemption.

[VERSE 4]
Bravo Bowyer, Pasley, Captain Hutt,
Each lost a leg, being sorely hurt;
Their lives they valu’d but as dirt,
  When that their country call’d them.
Poor Montague was kill’d that day;
’Twas by their shot, which fierce did play
Before the French they ran away,
  When we so sorely maul’d them.

[VERSE 5]
Of French ships there were twenty-six
When first upon them we did fix.
We valu’d not their Gallic tricks,
  We had but twenty-five sail;
We being British sailors bold,
Who value honour more than gold,
Our courage has been try’d of old,
  We ever will prevail.

[VERSE 6]
So since these French ships are brought in,
In honour of great George, our King,
In praise of sailors let us sing,
  And drink to each brave tar, sir;
For they are lads to win the day,
And drive the boasting French away;
To face our shot they will not stay,
  Our fame is heard afar, sir.

--- TITLE: A New Sea Song [item: PG76941-pg76941-153]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 15594-15698
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
’Twas on the twenty-eighth of May, the morning being clear,
A fleet to windward we espy’d; they Frenchmen did appear.
The signal for the same being made, the chace was soon begun;
And then for battle we prepar’d, to shew monsieurs some fun.
Our ship being clear’d, the foe we near’d, with expectations high,
That we should show the murd’rous foe, that British courage still
    would flow,
        To make them strike or die.

[VERSE 2]
The fam’d Bellerophon began her cannons first to play
Upon a three-deck’d ship of theirs, which could not run away:
Our hearts of gold their shot well told, in show’rs about her side,
‘Till the Leviathan came up, the battle to divide;
Then seeing plain ’twas quite in vain the contest more to try,
She struck; and this does shew that British courage still will flow,
        To make them strike or die.

[VERSE 3]
Night coming on, the battle ceas’d, till Phœbus rose again,
When we beheld this trait’rous fleet still vaunting on the main;
Our line being form’d, and all hearts warm’d, the fight was soon
    renew’d;
Determined to hand down that flag, which with contempt we view’d.
Lord Howe engaged their hottest rage; he broke their line to try
If such manœuvres would not shew that British courage still would
    flow,
        To make them strike or die.

[VERSE 4]
The battle warmly was maintain’d, much valour was display’d,
Till night, with all her sable train, the action still delay’d.
Now since again all o’er the main these rebels can’t be found
We’ll toast our admirals in our glass; our girls, too, shall go
    round.
Each heart shall sing, ‘Long Live the King!’ and each again reply.
‘If e’er we’re call’d again we’ll shew that British courage still
    shall flow,
        To make them strike or die.’

[VERSE 5]
We anxiously the Frenchmen sought for two days o’er the main,
And on the first of June we brought those rebels to again.
Lord Howe the signal made for each his opposite to take,
Not doubting then that such brave men would soon a conquest make.
The fight began, and ev’ry man his utmost power did try
To make these traitors feel and know that British courage still
    would flow,
        To make them strike or die.

[VERSE 6]
Two hours or more this battle was with matchless warmth maintain’d,
When Providence smil’d on our cause and vict’ry for us gain’d.
Though at one time three of the line upon our ship did fall
Yet we so well our shot did tell that we beat off them all.
The masts of one were soon brought down, and she a log did lie,
To make these ‘sans-culottes’ all know that British courage still
    shall flow,
        To make them strike or die.

[VERSE 7]
Our gallant chief commander too, by three was clos’d around;
He fought so bravely that the foe was forc’d to quit his ground.
Now nine or ten upon the main dismasted wrecks they lay;
And all the rest got so well drest they did not chuse to stay.
Thus o’er the main being left to reign, to England soon we’ll hie
With all our prizes, which will shew that British courage still
    will flow,
        To make them strike or die.

[VERSE 8]
But one small tribute let me pay, which justice does demand,
To Admiral Pasley, who this day was ta’en from his command.
One wicked shot, which they had got, his leg did sever soon,
Which robb’d the van of this brave man long e’er the fight was done.
Yet ’midst such play he’d smile and say, ‘Fight on, my lads, and try
To make these rebel Frenchmen know that British courage still will
    flow,
        To make them strike or die.’

[VERSE 9]
My shipmates, now let’s celebrate a day of great renown,
Which will this victory relate to ages yet unknown.
Come, let us raise our voice to praise the gallant name of Howe,
Who by this check the stubborn neck of France has made to bow.
May peace again, and all her train, with blessings from on high,
Shine on our Isle! then all shall know that Britons will such
    courage shew,
        To make them strike or die.

[VERSE 10]
                       God Save the King!

--- TITLE: The Blanche Frigate [item: PG76941-pg76941-154]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 15699-15775
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
You Frenchmen, don’t boast of your fighting, nor talk of great
    deeds, ’tis in vain;
Do you think that Old England you’ll frighten as easy as Holland
    and Spain?
We listen and laugh while you threaten, your boasting the valour of
    France,
Since your frigate Le Pique has been beaten by the jolly brave
    tars of the Blanche.

[VERSE 2]
She sail’d from the bay of Point Petre, four hundred and fifty on
    board,
And we were all ready to meet her: to conquer or die was the word!
The cans of good liquor were flowing, we gave them three cheers to
    advance,
And courage in each heart was glowing, for cowards ne’er sail’d in
    the Blanche.

[VERSE 3]
The night then upon us declining, the moon did afford us a light,
Each star with fresh lustre was shining, to keep the French frigate
    in sight.
The breeze gently filled all our sails, our ship through the water
    did launch,
And the grog flew in bumpers and pails amongst the brave tars in
    the Blanche.

[VERSE 4]
At midnight we came alongside, each ship being prepared for the
    fight;
‘Huzza!’ then bold Faulkner he cried, ‘we’ll conquer or perish this
    night’;
So they gave us a broadside to try our courage and found us all
    staunch,
Not a man there but rather would die, than cowardly yield up the
    Blanche.
The fight made the sea seem on fire; each bullet destructively flew.
Britannia her sons did inspire with courage that damp’d the French
    crew,
Saying, ‘Cowards, you surely must die, for over you Death turns his
    lance,’
While our balls repeat as they fly, ‘Fight on, my brave tars of the
    Blanche.’

[VERSE 5]
Our mainmast and mizen being gone the Frenchmen they thought us
    their own,
And with ‘Vive la République!’ their song we thought they would
    never have done.
We joined in their song undismayed, with music that made them all
    dance,
And not a false note was there played by the harmonious tars of the
    Blanche.

[VERSE 6]
When Faulkner resigned his last breath each tar gave a tear and a
    sigh,
Such sorrow was found at his death, but we’ll soon be revenged was
    the cry,
But, like Wolfe, with victory crowned, at his death he said ‘Ne’er
    mind my chance;
Fight on, my brave boys, or be drowned on board of our frigate the
    Blanche.’

[VERSE 7]
Bold Watkins his place soon supplied, and like a bold Hector engaged
His guns with more judgment to guide, for the death of his captain
    enraged;
And who could our fury allay when Le Pique alongside did advance?
The masts being all shot away we grappled her close to the Blanche.

[VERSE 8]
They thought it in vain to withstand; they called out for quarter
    amain.
Although the advantage they had still Britons were lords of the main.
So push the grog round, let it pass, since they found us
    true-hearted and staunch;
Every lad with his favourite lass drink success to the tars of the
    Blanche.

--- TITLE: The Amazon Frigate [item: PG76941-pg76941-155]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 15776-15843
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come, all you British seamen bold, that plow the raging main,
Come, listen to my tragedy while I relate the same;
’Tis what we underwent all on the raging main.
Bold Reynolds was our commander in the ship called the Amazon.

[VERSE 2]
On the 30th of December in Falmouth as we lay
Our orders came on board our anchors for to weigh;
So ‘Heave away!’ our captain cried; ‘we have no time to spare:
We’ll set our canvas to the breeze and through the ocean steer.’

[VERSE 3]
Our anchors weigh’d, our sails were set, our ship she seemed to fly;
It was the Indefatigable that bore us company.
We must bid adieu to our sweethearts because we must cross the main,
Hoping in a short time after to see them all again.

[VERSE 4]
We steered our course to the southward as far as Cape Finisterre,
Cruising the seas for several days and nothing could find there,
Till, running down the coast of Spain, three merchantmen we took,
And sent them home to England while we for more did look.

[VERSE 5]
But in bearing up for England an American ship we see,
That gave us good intelligence the French was at sea.
The weather it was thick, and, under an easy sail,
The wind it blew north-north-east and it blew a briskish gale.

[VERSE 6]
On the 28th of January a man sung from aloft
That he spy’d a lofty man-of-war at a distance three leagues off.
She’s a very lofty ship, the truth we will declare;
She crowded all sails she could, expecting to get clear.

[VERSE 7]
But we were at the heels of her, and night coming on,
At six o’clock that very night the bloody fight begun.
With broadside to broadside we play’d them two to one,
Till the blood out of the scupper holes all in a gore did run.

[VERSE 8]
Both round, grape, and double-head we poured in so fast,
That at eight o’clock that very night down came her mizen mast.
We engag’d them five glasses as close as we could lay,
While great guns, small arms, and cutlasses most sweetly they did
    play.
The Frenchmen all for quarters aloud to us did cry;
Their colours struck, no more could fight for love or liberty.
But the remnant of their shattered crew they unto us tell
That out of fifteen hundred men eight hundred of them fell.

[VERSE 9]
This ship was call’d the Droits de l’Homme; from Brest she lately
    came,
With guns mounted ninety-eight on board and fifteen hundred men.
Her intention was Ireland her troops all there to land,
But bold Pellew and his ship’s crew did stop their warlike band.

[VERSE 10]
Twas early the next morning the land it did appear,
And they were so disabled, from it they could not get clear;
And we were so disabled we could not veer or tack,
But down alongside our enemy we soon became a wreck.

[VERSE 11]
So now the Indefatigable is bound for England’s shore
To let our suffering country know the Amazon’s no more.
Still, we’ll drink to George our King, we’ll convince him of the
    same,
That British tars for evermore rule lords of the main.

--- TITLE: A New Song (The Seventeen Bright Stars) [item: PG76941-pg76941-156]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 15844-15926
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come, all you bold Britons to the seas do belong,
Of the seventeen bright stars I will sing you a song.
On the 15th of April, at Spithead as we lay,
Lord Bridport he hove out a signal to weigh:
But we one and all refused to obey.

[VERSE 2]
The reason unto you I now will relate:
We resolved to refuse the purser’s short weight;
Our humble petition to Lord Howe we sent,
That he to the Admiralty write to present
Our provisions and wages that they might augment.

[VERSE 3]
But soon, to our grief, as you shall understand,
They refused to comply with our humble demand;
Although to the Army they granted more pay,
While we sons of Neptune neglected did lay.
But the 15th of April soon roused them straightway.

[VERSE 4]
Then each son of Neptune took their oath without dread,
Until redress was obtained not to sail from Spithead;
Two tars from each ship of the line did appear
On board the Queen Charlotte without dread or fear,
While the ships manned their yards with a thundering loud cheer.

[VERSE 5]
Billy Pitt and Dundas soon heard of the news.
They fell in a rage, and the tars did abuse;
They sent for Lord Spencer and unto him did say:
‘For Portsmouth, my Lord, and make no delay,
For the mutinous tars refuse to obey.’
Lord Spencer unto us these words did express:
‘Your grievance, my lads, shall soon be redress;
Full provisions we have granted and a shilling a day.’
We trusted their honour, and our anchors did weigh,
But the wind coming west, at St. Helens we did lay.

[VERSE 6]
Now Providence, resolved we should not be oppressed,
For a fortnight or more kept the wind at south-west;
During which time, to our great surprize,
The Act was not passed to grant us supplies,
But Bedford and Clarence did open our eyes.

[VERSE 7]
When we found from their promise they meant for to run,
We resolved to force them before we had done.
When the signal was made for sea to repair,
We then did refuse with another loud cheer,
Which made our proud rulers to quake and to fear.

[VERSE 8]
The murdering Colpoys, Vice-Admiral of the blue,
Gave order to fire on the London ship’s crew;
While the enemy of Britain was ploughing the sea,
He, like a base coward, let them get away
When the French and their transports sailed for Bantry Bay.

[VERSE 9]
But at length from our king Lord Howe he was sent
To redress our grievance to our full content;
We received the old hero with joy as our friend,
And the Act being passed we will cheerfully sing
‘Confusion to France and long live our King!’

[VERSE 10]
Now, my brave boys, down Channel we steer
’Long with brave Bridport in search of Mounseer.
May Heaven but grant what we crave for a boon,
That these boasting invaders may out to us come,
And the tune that we will play them is the ‘First of June.’

[VERSE 11]
So now I must finish these lines that I have penned.
I hope no true Briton at them may be offended,
But remember the 15th of April, I pray,
And our wives and children keep a holiday;
For what April began we finish in May.

[VERSE 12]
Drink a health to Lord Howe in a full flowing glass,
Confusion to Pitt, likewise to Dundas.
The seventeen bright stars in a bumper shall roar,
Their praises shall sound from shore unto shore,
And they will never be forgot until Britain’s no more.

--- TITLE: The Genius Of Britain [item: PG76941-pg76941-157]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 15927-15967
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
The Genius of Britain went hovering round,
  For she fear’d that fair Freedom was fled;
But she found to her joy that she was not quite gone,
  But remain’d with the fleet at Spithead.
Rejoic’d at the news, to the Charlotte she flew,
  Where fair Freedom she heard sat enthron’d:
They all man’d the yards as the goddess came in,
  For Britain and Freedom they own’d.

[VERSE 2]
The fleet hail’d the goddess with three hearty cheers
  As she stood on the Charlotte’s gangway,
She drop’d a sad tear as she look’d on her sons
  Who so long neglected had lay;
She was led to the cabin. Fair Freedom was there,
  True Loyalty sat by her side;
Britannia sat down in a transport of joy:
  ‘All hail to my heroes!’ she cry’d.

[VERSE 3]
Every ship in the line sent two seamen so brave,
  Whom the goddess receiv’d with a smile:
They assured her that if they were treated like men
  They would still guard her favourite isle.
‘Go on, my brave sons, in the steps you now tread,
  Be virtue your guide and your guard,
And God, who rules over the land and the sea,
  Will your honest endeavours reward.’
The Genius of Ireland came in with her harp,
  She saluted fair Freedom with tears,
They man’d the yards to welcome her o’er,
  And every ship gave three cheers.
Success to the seventeen united bright stars,
  Let their praise echo round every shore,
And the fifteenth of April will ne’er be forgot
  Till Britannia and Freedom’s no more.

--- TITLE: British Tars Rewarded [item: PG76941-pg76941-158]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 15968-16013
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
The tars of Old England have long toil’d in vain,
From the time of King Charles down to the present reign;
But their royal master their wages doth raise,
So join, British sailors, in King George’s praise.

[VERSE 2]
The fleet of Lord Bridport, the terror of France,
Petition’d the throne that their pay might advance.
Their petitions were granted, each grievance redress’d,
In the heart of each seaman great George he is bless’d.

[VERSE 3]
No longer neglected, no longer forlorn,
Brave seamen will wander, dejected, our scorn;
Their petitions are granted, each grievance made known
Soon met with redress at the foot of the throne.

[VERSE 4]
Cheer, cheer, British seamen, your sails now unfurl,
Against our proud foes soon defiance we’ll hurl;
Our toils are rewarded, advanc’d is our pay.
Success to those seamen who gain’d us the day!

[VERSE 5]
Adieu, pretty Nancy of Portsmouth, adieu!
When your William is absent, I pray then be true.
To fight for our king and our country we go;
Our toils are rewarded, we’ll face the proud foe.

[VERSE 6]
Farewell to our children; farewell, dearest wives!
We don’t leave you distress’d, tho’ we venture our lives:
Our pay is advanced, which you shall receive;
Then dry up each tear, girls, and cease for to grieve.

[VERSE 7]
Then, my boys, hoist your sails, to Old England adieu,
No longer oppressed, to you we’ll prove true:
You shall find that a tar is both grateful and brave--
We’ll die, but our king and our country we’ll save.

[VERSE 8]
Three cheers, lads! three cheers, lads! we lose sight of land.
In defence of our country we’ll join heart and hand;
And when we return, boys, we’ll drink, dance and sing
With wives and with sweethearts, so God save the King!

--- TITLE: A New Song On Parker The Delegate, Head Of The Mutiny At Sheerness [item: PG76941-pg76941-159]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 16014-16058
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
I will not sing in Parker’s praise, disgraceful is the story,
Nor yet to seamen tune my lays, eclipsed is now their glory;
Fell Faction’s head they proudly rear ’gainst country and ’gainst
    king, sir,
And on their land they now do try destruction for to bring, sir.
      Then Britons all, with one accord, fight for your
          Constitution,
      And let surrounding foes behold we want no revolution.

[VERSE 2]
Parker the means has brought about our seamen to corrupt, sir,
And like a daring traitor bold, our trade doth interrupt, sir;
The ships at Sheerness rear the flag, the emblem of defiance,
With sorrow strikes us to reflect, on them we’ve no reliance.
      Then Britons all, etc.

[VERSE 3]
An admiral he calls himself, takes a commander’s station,
On board the Sandwich doth insult, and braves the English nation;
Gives law, dispenses life and death or punishment disgraceful,
And by his arbitrary deeds hath made himself most hateful.
      Then Britons all, etc.

[VERSE 4]
A terror to each merchant ship, detains and doth them plunder,
And if they offer to sail by, his guns at them do thunder;
Whate’er he likes he from them takes, and should they dare refuse,
    sir,
The captain’s ordered to be flogged, thus doth he them ill use, sir.
      Then Britons all, etc.

[VERSE 5]
Five hundred pounds is the reward, the traitor to bring in, sir,
Who thus the bloody flag hath reared ’gainst country and ’gainst
    king, sir;
Let’s hope the villain quickly will to punishment be brought, sir,
Who like a daring traitor bold his country’s ruin sought, sir.
      Then Britons all, with one accord, fight for your
          Constitution,
      And let surrounding foes behold we want no revolution.

--- TITLE: The Death Of Parker [item: PG76941-pg76941-160]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 16059-16102
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Ye gods above, protect a widow! and with pity look on me.
Help, O help me out of trouble, out of sad calamity!
It was by the death of Parker fortune prov’d to me unkind;
And though hung for mutiny, worse than he were left behind.

[VERSE 2]
Parker was my lawful husband, my bosom friend, whom I loved dear;
Yet at the time he was to suffer, alas! I could not him get near!
Again I ask’d, again I tried them--three times o’er and o’er, in
    vain;
They still that one request denied me, and ordered me on shore again.

[VERSE 3]
The yellow flag I thought was flying, a signal for my love to die;
The gun they fired, as was required, to hang him on the yard-arm
    high.
The boatswain did his best endeavour, and I on shore was sent
    straightway,
Where I stood watching, like a mermaid, to take my husband’s corpse
    away.

[VERSE 4]
At dead of night, when all was silent and many thousands fast asleep,
I, by two female friends attended, into the burying ground did creep.
Our trembling hands did serve as shovels with which the mould we
    moved away,
And then the body of my husband carried off without delay.

[VERSE 5]
A mourning coach for him was waiting: we drove to London with all
    speed,
Where decently I had him buried and a sermon o’er him said.
And now his sorrows are all over, and he’s free from guilt and pain;
I hope in heaven his soul is shining, where I shall meet with him
    again.

[VERSE 6]
Farewell, Parker, thou bright angel! once thou wert the Navy’s pride;
Since we did not die together, separate we must abide.
I must wait awhile with patience; on earth I hope not long to stay,
When we shall meet once more in glory, and all our sins be wash’d
    away.

--- TITLE: A New Song In Praise Of Admiral Duncan [item: PG76941-pg76941-161]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 16103-16189
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

# APPARATUS: By J. PRAT.

[VERSE 1]
To tame the Dutch, our treacherous foes,
And give Mynheers a bloody nose,
Brave Duncan to the Texel goes,
    Expecting they would meet him.
Many boisterous nights and days
We roll’d upon the raging seas,
Enduring hardships various ways;
Wind and cold, in storms we roll’d,
Yet our tars and admirals bold
    Resolved they would beat them.

[VERSE 2]
No toils nor storms the Dutch endure,
But snug at home they sleep secure,
And judge it safe not to unmoor
    While Duncan keeps his station.
When our brave Admiral saw their plan,
He said, ‘We’ll ’tice them if we can:
Let it be known that we are gone
To Yarmouth Roads to take on board
Fresh wholesome stores our isles afford--
    They’ll credit the relation.’

[VERSE 3]
Then we bore off for England’s shore,
And moored in Yarmouth Roads once more.
Our anchors soon the deep explore;
    We quickly were refitted.
Our Admiral soon a signal ’spies:
‘Prepare, my lads!’ he loudly cries;
‘The proud Mynheer from the Texel steers;
Our anchors weigh--make no delay,
We’ll shew our cowardly enemy
    ’Tis in vain for to escape us.’

[VERSE 4]
The shore we clear’d, and off we steer’d,
And soon in sight the Dutch appear’d;
The signal rose, the sailors cheer’d,
    And quickly rang’d for battle.
All hands then to their quarters run,
Each tar with courage seiz’d his gun;
At twelve the bloody fight begun,
At every fire our foes expire;
We drubbed them to our heart’s desire:
    God prosper British sailors!

[VERSE 5]
Dutch ships eleven with fire and rage
Did fiercely three of ours engage,
But we their fury did assuage
    And made them to surrender:
De Winter haul’d his colours down,
And their vice-admiral soon did own
That victory British tars must crown;
Of eleven more that struck, but four
Escap’d to tell their friends on shore
    That all the rest were taken.

[VERSE 6]
On board the Ardent, known so well,
Brave Captain Burgess boldly fell;
His loss we mourn, but fame shall tell
    His worth to future ages.
Our efforts they could not evade,
Two admirals we prisoners made;
Ships of the line we captured nine:
In a battered state the rest retreat,
To weep at home their sad defeat
    On the glorious eleventh of October.

[VERSE 7]
Let every loyal Briton sing
God save great George our King!
And in her train may Victory bring
    Long peace unto our nation;
To Duncan and his tars success,
Who did the Dutch so warmly dress;
And Vincent bold, who Spain controul’d;
With Home also, who aim’d a blow
That brought the fleet of Gallia low.
    Success to all true Britons!

--- TITLE: A New Song On The Engagement Fought Between The Mars And La Hercule [Sic] April 21, 1798 [item: PG76941-pg76941-162]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 16190-16226
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Bright honor now calls--each true Briton attend
Unto these few lines which here I have penn’d.
I sing of a battle that was fought at sea,
The Mars was the British, the French ship Herculé.

[CHORUS]

    Then fill up a glass to each tar stout and good,
    Success to each seaman--a tear for brave Hood.

[VERSE 2]
We were cruising off Brest when the French we did spy:
We quickly gave chase, but they from us did fly;
We crouded each sail and gave them a broadside,
Fought them more than two hours and lower’d their pride.

[VERSE 3]
We brought her to England, the flower of France--
Thus, thus may we serve all who dare to advance.
She’s been built but six weeks, and her guns were fourscore,
Whilst the brave little Mars carry’d seventy-four.

[VERSE 4]
Yet see, see Britannia with sorrow is fill’d,
For brave Captain Hood in the action was kill’d;
Likewise the Marines lost their captain so bold,
His name it was White, worth his full weight in gold.

[VERSE 5]
The French lost three hundred, and we lost threescore,
In kill’d and in wounded. Thank God ’twas no more!
Here’s a health to the crew of the brave jolly Mars,
With another full bumper to all jolly tars.

--- TITLE: Verses Written On Board His Majesty’S Ship The Astræa, By The Younger Midshipmen Of That Frigate, 1798 [item: PG76941-pg76941-163]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 16227-16277
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
When in the cockpit all was dim,
And not a mid dared show his glim,
    A youth was left alone.
He scratched his head, surveyed his clothes,
Then took the other cheering dose,
    And thus began his moan:--

[VERSE 2]
‘Ah! Cursed be that fatal day
When I from home was led astray,
    In this damned place to dwell:
Oh! had I in the country stay’d
I might have learnt some useful trade
    And scorn’d the white lapelle.

[VERSE 3]
‘When first on board the ship I went,
My belly full, my mind content,--
    No sorrows touched my heart:
I view’d my coat, so flash and new,
My gay cockade, my hanger too,
    And thought them wondrous smart.

[VERSE 4]
‘But now, alas! my coat is rent;
My hanger’s pawned; my money spent;
    My former friends I’ve missed;
And when of hardships I complain,
My messmates swear ’tis all in vain,
    And cry “What made you list?”

[VERSE 5]
‘But hark! I hear the corp’ral’s tread:
Another dose, and then to bed,
    Of every joy bereft:
I shake my bottle with a doubt;
My poor half-pint is quite drained out,
    Not one kind drop is left.’
The youth with indignation burns,
Into his hated hammock turns;
    Alas! not long to sleep:
The quartermaster, with hoarse tongue,
Awakes him; says ‘The bell has rung!’
    He’s roused, his watch to keep.

[VERSE 6]
Shiv’ring he walks the quarter-deck,
Dreading the stern lieutenant’s check,
    Who struts the weather-side;
With glass and trumpet in his hand,
He bellows forth his harsh command,
    With arrogance and pride.

--- TITLE: The Arrow Sloop Of War [item: PG76941-pg76941-165]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 16341-16391
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
You Britons bold, that never was controul’d, come listen unto me,
And a song to you I’ll sing, none but the truth you’ll hear:
Concerning of a fight, brave boys, which happen’d late, you know,
Commanded by bold Portlock, and the ship call’d the Arrow.

[VERSE 2]
The most of people call’d her the Carpenter’s Mistake,
Because she had two maintopsail-yards, and head and stern alike.
They said she’d prove a coffin to all our brave ship’s crew;
But instead of that, my British boys made the Dutch dogs to rue.

[VERSE 3]
We being new constructed, they said our guns were leather;
They said we steer’d by sleight of hand, they could not see our
    ruther.
They said our sides were gingerbread, and our shot were made of clay,
But the Dutch they prov’d full sorry on’t when us they felt that day.
On the thirteenth of September we saw a Dutch ship lay
All at anchor in Hallen’s stream: we bore for her straightway.
In full fifteen minutes raked fore and aft we were
Before we could come up to her or bring our guns to bear.

[VERSE 4]
But, when we did come up to her, our anchor we let go.
Their captain cries, ‘Come, British boys, we will make sure of you.’
But when we did begin, my boys, the yards and rigging flew
For raking us we paid them off, both for the old and new.
The second broadside we gave to them their ensign staff came down.
‘Well done, my boys!’ our captain cries; ‘they see us in Hallen
    stream town
How we do use their shipping so nigh unto their shore.’
And the people stood a-looking on, and heard our great guns roar.

[VERSE 5]
For five-and-twenty minutes so swift we sent them shot,
Our action it was very short, but it was very hot.
Whilst they sung out for quarter, our captain he did say,
‘Avast, my boys, with honour, we’ve shown them British play.

[VERSE 6]
‘The action being over, and the pris’ners safe on board,
We’ll keep safe below, my boys, and toss a can of grog.
And when we come to Portsmouth, with a girl on each knee,
We’ll spend our money cheerfully, and then again to sea.’

[VERSE 7]
It is now for to finish this my warlike song,
I am a saucy foremast Jack, to the Arrow do belong.
In praise of Captain Portlock and his officers we’ll sing,
And not forgetting the Arrow’s crew, and long live George our King!

--- TITLE: Action Off Copenhagen [item: PG76941-pg76941-167]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 16585-16654
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
You undaunted sons of Britannia, lend an ear,
A story concerning a fight you shall hear.
It was on March the 12th, my boys, our fleet did sail
Out of Yarmouth with a sweet and pleasant gale.
Our Commander-in-Chief, Admiral Parker by name,
And Vice-Admiral Nelson, that man of great fame,
And Rear-Admiral Graves which drew up the rear,
While so boldly for Elsenore Castle we steer’d.

[VERSE 2]
On the 13th we so boldly pass’d Elsenore by,
While so many thousand shot and shells they did fly;
Then straight for Copenhagen our fleet they did steer,
And we anchor’d abreast of the town without fear.

[VERSE 3]
On the second of April it was the glorious day
When bold Nelson’s division they got under weigh--
Each ship set for action, each man to his gun,
Resolv’d so boldly we was for to run.

[VERSE 4]
It was into the roads where the Danish flag did fly,
Determin’d alongside of their fleet for to lie;
Said we will make them to strike, my boys, or else we’ll send them
    down,
There for to storm and set fire to their town.

[VERSE 5]
The first was the Edgar, she did lead the van,
At eleven o’clock the heavy fire began,
The Ardent and Glatton, the rest did the same,
The Defiance and Monarch behaved with great fame.

[VERSE 6]
Then in came Lord Nelson, in the Elephant;
Next Bellona and Ganges, so boldly they went;
The bold Polyphemus run in the same way,
And the brave little Isis her part she did play.

[VERSE 7]
The Amazon, the Hermione, the Desirée and Blanch,
They anchor’d in the line and behav’d so staunch;
The Otter and the Dart they anchor’d also,
Until by a signal was forc’d for to go.

[VERSE 8]
Now these four frigates that we have mentioned here,
And two little sloops that run in without fear,
They all run and anchor’d alongside the fleet,
Their forts the same time they began to defeat.

[VERSE 9]
But so great was their mistake, at about four o’clock
They found they could no longer stand our shot;
For their batteries we clear’d, my boys, which was our own desire
And the town in three places our bombs set on fire.
Seven of their two-deckers to us they did strike,
And six floating batteries likewise did the like.
‘Well done, my brave boys!’ said Lord Nelson; ‘that’s right,
For your courage and mine you have displayed in this fight.’

[VERSE 10]
So now, my brave boys, let it never be said
That ever Lord Nelson or Graves was afraid.
Success to our officers throughout the whole fleet,
That encouraged the Britons the Danes to defeat.

[VERSE 11]
So now to conclude and to finish my log,
Call up the steward to serve out the grog.
Here’s a health to our wives and sweethearts at home,
For they’ll give us a glass when to England we come.

--- TITLE: A New Song On Lord Nelson’S Victory At Copenhagen [item: PG76941-pg76941-168]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 16655-16697
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Draw near, ye gallant seamen, while I the truth unfold
Of as gallant a naval victory as ever yet was told.
The second day of April last, upon the Baltic main,
Parker, Nelson, and their brave tars fresh laurels there did gain.
          With their thundering and roaring, rattling and roaring,
          Thundering and roaring bombs.

[VERSE 2]
Gallant Nelson volunteer’d himself, with twelve sail form’d a line,
And in the Road of Copenhagen he began his grand design;
His tars, with usual courage, their valour did display,
And destroy’d the Danish navy upon that glorious day.
          With their, etc.

[VERSE 3]
With strong floating batteries in van and rear we find,
The enemy in centre had six ships of the line--
At ten that glorious morning the fight begun, it’s true;
We Copenhagen set on fire, my boys, before the clock struck two.
          With their, etc.

[VERSE 4]
When this armament we had destroy’d, we anchor’d near the town,
And with our bombs were fully bent to burn their city down;
Revenge for poor Matilda’s wrongs our seamen swore they’d have;
But they sent a flag of truce on board, their city for to save.
          With their, etc.

[VERSE 5]
For the loss of his eye and arm, bold Nelson does declare,
The foes of his country not an inch of them he’ll spare;
The Danes he’s made to rue the day that they ever Paul did join,
Eight ships he burnt, four he sunk, and took six of the line.
          With their, etc.

[VERSE 6]
Now drink a health to gallant Nelson, the wonder of the world,
Who, in defence of his country, his thunder loud has hurled;
And to his bold and valiant tars who plough the raging sea,
And who never were afraid to face the daring enemy.
          With their, etc.

--- TITLE: A New Song Composed By The Wounded Tars At The Siege Of Boulogne [item: PG76941-pg76941-169]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 16698-16732
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
On the second day of August, eighteen hundred and one,
We sailed with Lord Nelson to the port of Boulogne,
For to cut out their shipping, which was all in vain--
To our great misfortune, they were all moored with chain.
Our boats being well manned, by eleven at night,
To cut out their shipping, not expecting they would fight;
But the grape from their batteries so smartly did play,
Nine hundred brave seamen killed and wounded did lay.

[VERSE 2]
We hoisted our colours, and boldly them spread,
With the British flag flying at the royal mast-head;
For the honour of England we will always maintain,
While bold British seamen plough the watery main.

[VERSE 3]
Exposed to the fire of the enemy we lay,
While ninety bright pieces of cannon did play;
There many brave seamen then lay in their gore,
And the shot from their batteries most smartly did pour.

[VERSE 4]
Our noble commander, with his heart full of grief,
Used every endeavour to afford us relief;
No ship could assist us, as well he did know,
In this wounded condition we were toss’d to and fro.

[VERSE 5]
All you who relieve us, the Lord you will bless
For relieving poor seamen in times of distress;
May the Lord put an end to all cruel wars,
Send peace and contentment to all British tars.

--- TITLE: France Cover’D With Glory, Being A Faithful Narrative Taken From The Report Of The Gallant Admiral Linois [item: PG76941-pg76941-170]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 16733-16799
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Good people all, I pray attend a most surprising story:
’Tis of an action on the main, that cover’d France with glory.
’Twas on the ninth day of July, from Cadiz post away
Six sail o’ th’ line, and frigates three, to Algesiras Bay.
For, kept by th’ English in blockade, the mighty Linois lay,
With five large ships, a frigate too, in Algesiras Bay.
These to relieve Moreno came, not to engage in fight,
But to the port of Cadiz straight with them combine in flight.

[VERSE 2]
A fresh east wind rose on the twelfth--the French and Spaniards go,
For Cadiz swift they sail, and take the Hannibal in tow.
Now this same eastward gale, alas! brought on the English fleet,
Who seem to wish for nothing more than enemies to meet.

[VERSE 3]
Five sail o’ th’ line the English had, a frigate and a brig--
They came as if they did not care for France and Spain a fig.
The night came on, and France and Spain were very much in fear,
As stronger grew the eastern breeze, more English might appear.

[VERSE 4]
Hence they were puzzled what to do--that is, which way to fly--
For what, indeed, are France and Spain when British tars are nigh!
At length th’ allies heard cannon three, and fires saw far behind--
They thought them English signals, so they push’d before the wind.

[VERSE 5]
Then they congratulate themselves that they were got together,
And that they sail’d so very well beyond Old England’s tether.
A conflagration soon they saw burst through the dark of night,
Which seem’d to be their ships on fire--Oh! then how great their
    fright!
Such their first thoughts; but soon they fear’d ’twas fire-ships of
    the foe:
That was enough to urge their speed, and wondrous fast they go.
No longer there could be a doubt, the foe has pass’d the Strait;
Nay, they had reach’d the Gallic wake--there was no time to wait.

[VERSE 6]
The French at their maintop-mast-head had put the light to rally;
But pull’d it down when th’ English came, lest they too near might
    sally.
For well the wary Frenchmen knew, if they hold forth a light,
It must have led the English on, to force them into fight.

[VERSE 7]
The night the French in anguish pass’d, because it did not show
Whether some ships that were in sight were enemies or no.
At length the day dispers’d their fears--a day it was most sweet;
For why?--the French soon found themselves in midst of their own
    fleet.

[VERSE 8]
At five o’clock they heard a sound that did denote a fray,
Which made the Frenchmen all rejoice they were so far away.
The wind about eleven rose--four vessels came in view:
They thought them friends, but found them foes, and then again they
    flew.

[VERSE 9]
The Formidable then they saw driving before the wind,
As if she said, ‘The Devil take all those that are behind.’
At length the French with rapture found they need not fret and chafe,
The foe they had escap’d and then anchor’d in Cadiz safe.
And now to all our naval lads may Heav’n still give a blessing--
And if defeat with glory clads, may France ne’er want a dressing!

--- TITLE: Nelson’S Glorious Victory At Trafalgar [item: PG76941-pg76941-172]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 16835-16902
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Arise, arise, brave Britons!
  Perform your loudest lays,
And join me in a chorus
  To sing Britannia’s praise.
Once more the hero of the Nile
Did seek to make Britannia smile
With another victory on the file--
    O brave Nelson!

[VERSE 2]
October, on the twenty-first,
  It being a glorious day,
The combined fleets of France and Spain
  Were just off Cadiz Bay;
Their ships in number thirty-three--
And Nelson, when he did them see,
Said, ‘Twenty then there is for me.’
    O brave Nelson!

[VERSE 3]
The signal made for fighting,
  Cannon began to roar;
Our ships in number twenty-seven,
  We shook the Spanish shore;
And Nelson, on the deck so high,
Aloud unto his men did cry,
‘We’ll conquer them, my lads, or die.’
    O brave Nelson!
He broke their line of battle,
  And struck the fatal blow;
He blew some up into the air,
  And some he sent below.
But then, with victory on his side,
A fatal ball his life destroyed,
He in the midst of glory died.
    O brave Nelson!

[VERSE 4]
When the hero brave was dying,
  And with his parting breath,
He pray’d for England’s glory
  Till the moment of his death.
‘Farewell, my lads! My glass is run,
This day must be my setting sun;
But, Providence, thy will be done.’
    O brave Nelson!

[VERSE 5]
The battle being over,
  Which was a bloody fray,
We twenty of their finest ships
  From them did take away.
Now, Bonaparte! boast no more
To land upon our native shore,
Lest you in pieces should be tore,
    Through brave Nelson.

[VERSE 6]
May Collingwood’s and Hardy’s
  Like Nelson’s fame resound,
And all our force by land and sea
  With good success be crowned;
May Britain’s trade and wealth increase,
And wars and tumults ever cease,
And may we have a lasting peace,
    Through brave Nelson.

--- TITLE: A New Song Composed On The Death Of Lord Nelson [item: PG76941-pg76941-173]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 16903-16969
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come all you gallant seamen that unite a meeting,
  Attend to these lines I am going to relate,
And when you’ve heard them ’twill move you with pity,
  To hear how Lord Nelson he met with his fate;
For he was a bold and undaunted commander,
  As ever did sail on the ocean so wide,
He made both the French and the Spaniards surrender,
  By pouring always into them a broadside.
          Mourn, England, mourn, mourn and complain,
          For the loss of Lord Nelson who died on the main.

[VERSE 2]
One hundred engagements he had been in, sir,
  And ne’er in his life was he known to be beat,
Tho’ he’d lost an arm, likewise a right eye, sir,
  No power on earth ever could him defeat.
His age at his death it was forty and seven,
  And as long as I breathe his great praises I’ll sing,
For the whole navigation to him was given,
  Because he was loyal and true to his king.
          Mourn, England, mourn, etc.

[VERSE 3]
Like an undaunted hero, exposed to the fire,
  He gave his command, on the quarter-deck stood,
To hear of his actions you would much admire,
  To see the decks covered all with human blood.
From aloft to below where he was commanding,
  All by a French gun he received a ball,
And by the contents he got mortally wounded,
  And that was the cause of Lord Nelson’s fall.
          Mourn, England, mourn, etc.

[VERSE 4]
Then up steps the doctor in a very great hurry,
  And unto Lord Nelson these words he did say,
‘Indeed then, my lord, I am very sorry
  To see you here lying and bleeding this way.’
‘No matter, no matter whatever about me,
  My time it has come--I am almost at the worst,
But there’s my gallant seamen fighting so boldly,
  Discharge of your duty unto them all first.’
          Mourn, England, mourn, etc.

[VERSE 5]
Then with a loud voice he called out to his captain,
  ‘Pray let me, sir, know how the battle does go,
For I think our great guns continue to rattle,
  Though death is approaching I firmly do know.’
‘The antagonist’s ship is gone to the bottom,
  Eighteen we have captur’d and brought them on board,
Four more we have blown clean out of the ocean,
  And this is the news I have brought you, my lord.’
          Mourn, England, mourn, etc.

[VERSE 6]
Come all you gallant seamen that unite in a meeting,
  Always let Lord Nelson’s memory go round,
For it is your duty when you unite in a meeting,
  Because he was loyal and true to the crown.
So now to conclude, and to finish these verses,
  Here’s God bless all seamen that speak for his good,
May the heavens go with you, and ten thousand blessings
  Still rest on the fleet and brave Collingwood.
          Mourn, England, mourn, etc.

--- TITLE: Admiral Strachan’S Victory [item: PG76941-pg76941-174]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 16970-17013
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Though with tears we lament our great Nelson’s demise,
Let the nation rejoice that more Nelsons arise;
’Twas Collingwood finish’d what the hero began,
And brave was the conquest accomplished by Strachan.
        Hearts of oak, etc.

[VERSE 2]
The fourth of November, long famous in story,
This year adds a ray to our national glory;
For like Cæsar of old, our Cæsar might say,
He came, saw, and conquer’d in the enemy’s bay.
        Hearts of oak, etc.

[VERSE 3]
The Phœnix transform’d, like a bird to decoy,
Led the foe where she knew they would soon find employ;
Only three days before, she had quitted her nest,
To add a fresh Didon to her valorous crest.
        Hearts of oak, etc.

[VERSE 4]
Her consort Margarita, though first in the chase,
Both at once pour’d their broadsides full butt in their face;
The Cæsar, the Hero, and brave Courageux,
With cannon and grape shot, soon buckled them to.
        Hearts of oak, etc.

[VERSE 5]
To bind the knot firmer, Namur had her share,
By Æolus favor’d, and Revolutionnaire;
Though brave their resistance, they fought in vain,
For they seem’d, when they struck, mere wrecks on the main.
        Hearts of oak, etc.

[VERSE 6]
Safe moor’d at Plymouth, no more shall they wander,
And fit for the line of a British commander;
Then France, Spain, and Holland shall threaten in vain,
While our tars fight and conquer again and again.
        Hearts of oak, etc.

--- TITLE: New Song On The Engagement Between The Amethyst And Thetis, English And French Frigates [item: PG76941-pg76941-175]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 17014-17057
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come, all you valiant heroes that sail upon the sea,
Awhile give your attention to what I sing to thee:
’Tis of a famous battle that was fought upon the main,
Where our brave British sailors fresh laurels they did gain,

[VERSE 2]
Between the Amethyst frigate--thirty-six guns had she,
And as brave a crew, my boys, as ever sail’d the sea--
And the Thetis, French frigate of fifty guns; I do declare,
Such a hard engagement has not been known for many a year.

[VERSE 3]
At seven in the evening the battle it begun,
And lasted many hours before that it was done.
Great numbers there was wounded, a many too was slain,
While the blood from off the decks did change the watery main.

[VERSE 4]
Three hours and twenty minutes we held this dreadful fray,
We lasht her fast unto us, she could not get away;
Many times they tried to board us, but we drove them back so fast--
Altho’ they was so numerous, we made them yield at last.

[VERSE 5]
Then down she haul’d her colours, no longer could she fight;
Our British tars they gave three cheers all at this noble sight.
We took possession of her without any more delay,
And sent her into Plymouth Sound then, my boys, straightway.

[VERSE 6]
Great store of artillery, ammunition too likewise,
One thousand barrels of flour to our tars became a prize.
She was bound out to Martinico, the truth I do declare,
But in the night we met her and stopped her career.

[VERSE 7]
So now to conclude and to finish my song,
Success to our noble tars that to the seas belong.
Here is a health to Captain Seymour and all his valiant men!
Whene’er they meet their enemies may they serve them so again.

--- TITLE: A New Song On The Successful Attempt Of Destroying The French Fleet In Basque Roads On The 11Th April 1809 [item: PG76941-pg76941-176]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 17058-17101
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come, all you valiant Britons of every degree,
Attend a few minutes, and listen unto me
Concerning our brave sailors that sailed on the main,
With courage so bold fresh laurels they did gain.
    Success to our sailors that sail on the sea,
    Who with Cockrane undaunted, whenever they’ve wanted,
    They’ll fight till they die, or gain the victory.

[VERSE 2]
It was in Basque Roads the fleet they did lay,
At the sight of our shipping fill’d them with dismay,
They skulk’d near the shore like cowardly curs,
And dare not come out to face our brave British tars
                                      So success, etc.

[VERSE 3]
In the month of April, mind what I say,
We resolv’d to try this fleet to destroy:
We gave them three cheers before we set to,
And galled them so sorely we made them cry ‘Morbleu!’
                                      So success, etc.

[VERSE 4]
We poured in our shot and our rockets like hail,
Till at length that their courage began for to fail.
Some were taken and destroy’d, and some got on shore,
The rest run up the harbour and would fight no more,
                                      So success, etc.

[VERSE 5]
This fleet from Brest Harbour some time ago got clear,
And our brave British heroes soon after them did steer:
We chas’d them to Basque Roads without fear or doubt,
Tho’ so great was their number they dare not come out.
                                      So success, etc.
So now, Master Boneyparte, cease for to brag,
Till you build some more ships for to hoist your white flag
Which so often has been beat by the lords of the main;
And if they dare face them they’ll serve them so again.
                                      So success, etc.

--- TITLE: A Copy Of Verses On Jefferys The Seaman [item: PG76941-pg76941-177]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 17102-17139
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
You captains and commanders both by land and sea,
O do not be hard-hearted, refrain from cruelty;
It is of Jefferys the seaman, who, though not cast away,
Was left upon a dismal rock, by his captain they say.

[CHORUS]
Think of Jefferys the seaman’s hard fate.

[VERSE 2]
For eight days and nights he in misery did remain,
Without any food or nourishment himself for to sustain;
Dejected, in a wretched state, his fate he did deplore,
For some good Christian to convey him to his native shore.

[VERSE 3]
At length kind Providence gave ear unto his mournful strain:
An American vessel to his assistance came;
John Dennis’s humanity soon set him free,
And very soon released him from his captivity.

[VERSE 4]
It really is surprising he could so cruel be
Unto his fellow creature, lost to humanity
And any Christian feeling; that such corrections there be,
It is a pity such should have a command, either by land or sea.

[VERSE 5]
But now he is arrived unto Old England’s shore,
And I think he is very much to blame to go to sea any more.
The gentry pity his fate as his suffering he explores,
He is glad to have the happy sight of his native land once more.

[VERSE 6]
His mother, in amazement, almost distracted run
When she view’d the situation of her dear only son.
Quite meagre and almost starving, with hunger and fatigue,
This sight it caused his aged mother’s heart then for to bleed.

--- TITLE: Ye Parliament Of England [item: PG76941-pg76941-178]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 17140-17191
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Ye Parliament of England, you Lords and Commons too,
Consider well what you’re about, and what you’re going to do;
You’re now to fight with Yankees, I’m sure you’ll rue the day
You roused the sons of liberty in North America.

[VERSE 2]
You first confined our commerce, and said our ships sha’n’t trade;
You next impressed our seamen, and used them as your slaves;
You then insulted Rogers while ploughing o’er the main,
And had not we declared war you’d have done it o’er again.
You thought our frigates were but few and Yankees could not fight,
Until brave Hull your Guerrière took and banished her from your
    sight.
The Wasp then took your Frolic, we’ll nothing say to that--
The Poictiers being of the line, of course she took her back.

[VERSE 3]
The next, your Macedonian, no finer ship could swim,
Decatur took her gilt-work off, and then he sent her in.
The Java by a Yankee ship was sunk, you all must know;
The Peacock fine, in all her plume, by Lawrence down did go.

[VERSE 4]
Then next you sent your Boxer to box us all about,
But we had an Enterprising brig that beat your Boxer out;
We boxed her up to Portland and moored her off the town,
To show the sons of liberty the Boxer of renown.

[VERSE 5]
The next upon Lake Erie, where Perry had some fun,
You own he beat your naval force, and caused them for to run;
This was to you a sore defeat, the like ne’er known before--
Your British squadron beat complete--some took, some run ashore.

[VERSE 6]
There’s Rogers, in the President, will burn, sink and destroy;
The Congress, on the Brazil coast, your commerce will annoy;
The Essex, in the South Seas, will put out all your lights,
The flag she waves at her mast-head--‘Free Trade and Sailors’
    Rights.’

[VERSE 7]
Lament, ye sons of Britain, far distant is the day
When you’ll regain by British force what you’ve lost in America;
Go tell your King and Parliament, by all the world ’tis known
That British force by sea and land by Yankees is o’erthrown.

[VERSE 8]
Use every endeavour, and strive to make a peace,
For Yankee ships are building fast, their navy to increase;
They will enforce their commerce, the laws by heaven are made
That Yankee ships in time of peace to any port may trade.

--- TITLE: The Constitution And Guerrière [item: PG76941-pg76941-179]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 17192-17275
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
# APPARATUS: Air--The Landlady of France.
It oft-times has been told
That the British seamen bold
Could flog the tars of France
    So neat and handy, O!
But they never met their match
Till the Yankees did them catch,--
Oh! the Yankee boy for fighting
    Is the dandy, O!

[VERSE 2]
The Guerrière, a frigate bold,
On the foaming ocean roll’d,
Commanded by proud Dacres,
    All the grandee, O!
With as choice a British crew
As a rammer ever drew,--
They could flog the French men, two to one
    So handy, O!

[VERSE 3]
When this frigate bore in view,
Says proud Dacres to his crew:
‘Come! clear the ship for action
    And be handy, O!
To the weather-gage, boys, get her!’--
And to make his men fight better
Gave them gunpowder to drink
    Mixed with brandy, O!

[VERSE 4]
Then Dacres loudly cries,
‘Make this Yankee ship your prize,--
You can in thirty minutes,
    Neat and handy, O!
Twenty-five’s enough, I’m sure;
And if you do it in a score
I’ll treat you to a double share
    Of brandy, O!’

[VERSE 5]
The British shot flew hot,
Which the Yankee answered not
Till they got within the distance
    They call handy, O!
Now says Hull unto his crew:
‘Boys, let’s see what we can do!--
If we take this boasting Briton
    We’re the dandy, O!’

[VERSE 6]
The first broadside we poured,
Came her mainmast by the board,
Which made this lofty frigate
    Look abandoned, O’!
Then Dacres shook his head,
And to his officers he said,
‘Lord--I didn’t think these Yankees
    Were so handy, O!’

[VERSE 7]
Our second told so well
That their fore and mizen fell,
Which doused the royal ensign
    Neat and handy, O!
‘By George!’ says he, ‘we’re done!’--
And then fired a lee gun,
While the Yankees struck up
    ‘Yankee doodle dandy, O!’

[VERSE 8]
Then Dacres came on board
To deliver up his sword,
Loth was he to part with it,
    ’Twas so handy, O!
‘Oh! keep your sword,’ says Hull,
‘For it only makes you dull;
Cheer up,--and take a little drink
    Of brandy, O!’

[VERSE 9]
Come! fill your glasses full!
And we’ll drink ‘To Captain Hull,’
And so merrily we’ll push about
    The brandy, O!
John Bull may toast his fill!
But let the world say what it will,
The Yankee boy for fighting
    Is the dandy, O!

--- TITLE: Shannon And Chesapeake [item: PG76941-pg76941-180]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 17276-17335
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
The Chesapeake so bold,
Out of Boston, we’ve been told,
Came to take the British frigate
    Neat and handy, O!
All the people of the port
They came out to see the sport,
And the bands were playing
    ‘Yankee doodle dandy, O!’

[VERSE 2]
The British frigate’s name,
Which for the purpose came
Of cooling Yankee courage
    Neat and handy, O!
Was the Shannon--Captain Broke.
All her crew were hearts of oak,
And at fighting they’re allowed to be
    The dandy, O!

[VERSE 3]
Now before the fight begun,
The Yankees with much fun,
Said they’d take the British frigate
    Neat and handy, O!
And after that they’d dine,
Treat their sweethearts all with wine,
And the band should play up
    ‘Yankee doodle dandy, O!’

[VERSE 4]
We no sooner had begun
Than from their guns they run,
Though before they thought they worked ’em
    Neat and handy, O!
Brave Broke he waved his sword,
Crying, ‘Now, my lads, we’ll board,
And we’ll stop their playing
    “Yankee doodle dandy, O!”’

[VERSE 5]
We no sooner heard the word
Than we all jumped aboard
And tore down the colours
    Neat and handy, O!
Notwithstanding all their brag
O’er the glorious British flag,
At the Yankee mizen-peak
    It looked the dandy, O!

[VERSE 6]
Here’s a health to Captain Broke,
And all the hearts of oak,
That took the Yankee frigate
    Neat and handy, O!
And may we always prove
That in fighting and in love,
The true British sailor
    Is the dandy, O!

--- TITLE: Battle Of The Shannon And Chesapeake [item: PG76941-pg76941-181]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 17336-17385
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
On board the Shannon frigate in the merry month of May,
To watch the bold Americans off Boston lights we lay.
The Chesapeake lay in harbour, a frigate stout and fine,
Four hundred and forty men she had, her guns were forty-nine.
’Twas Captain Broke commanded us, a challenge he did write
To the captain of the Chesapeake to bring her out to fight.
Our captain says, ‘Brave Lawrence, ’tis not from enmity,
But ’tis to prove to all the world that we rule on the sea.

[VERSE 2]
‘Don’t think, my noble captain, because you have had success
That British tars are humbled, not even in distress.
No! we will fight like heroes our glory to maintain,
In defiance of superior size and the number of your men.’
The challenge was accepted, the Americans came down,
A finer frigate ne’er belonged unto the British crown.
They brought her into action on the true British plan,
Nor fired a shot till within hail--then they the fight began.

[VERSE 3]
Broadside for broadside then did yield a most tremendous roar,
Like thunder it resounded, re-echoed from each shore.
This dreadful firing lasted near a quarter of an hour;
Then the enemy’s ship drove right aboard, their yards were locked
    in ours.

[VERSE 4]
Our captain went to their ship’s side to see how she did lie,
When he beheld the enemy’s men who from their guns did fly.
‘All hands for boarding!’ now he cry’d; ‘the victory is sure.
Come bear a hand, my gallant boys, our prize we’ll soon secure.’

[VERSE 5]
Like lions then we rush’d on board, we fought them hand to hand,
And tho’ they overnumbered us they could not us withstand.
They fought in desperation, disorder, and dismay,
And in about three minutes’ time were forced to give way.

[VERSE 6]
Their captain and lieutenant with seventy of the crew
Were killed in this sharp action, and an hundred wounded too.
The ship was taken to Halifax and the captain buried there,
And the remainder of his crew as his chief mourners were.

[VERSE 7]
Have courage then, all British tars, and never be dismay’d,
But put the can of grog about and drink success to trade,
Likewise to gallant Captain Broke and all his valiant crew,
Who beat the bold Americans and brought their courage to.

--- TITLE: A New Song, Called The Endymion’S Triumph [item: PG76941-pg76941-182]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 17386-17478
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come, all you valiant British tars, attend unto my theme.
In eighteen hundred and fifteen this fact I will proclaim:
As we were cruising off New York, the night it being clear,
Bold Mars to us a message sent an enemy was near.

[VERSE 2]
On January fifteen, just by the dawn of day,
We ’spied a Yankee frigate that just had put to sea.
To her our squadron soon gave chace, but all soon dropt behind,
Except the bold Endymion, who flew before the wind.

[VERSE 3]
It was a handsome chace, my boys, as ever yet was seen,
Each man stood to his quarters, for victory was keen;
When, about the hour of four o’clock, long tom began to tell,
With her we soon came up, brave boys, our ship could sail so well.

[VERSE 4]
Their Commodore Decatur all hands on deck did call,
Saying, ‘Be of good courage, their vessel’s very small;
Besides, we have two men to one--so, boys, be not asleep,
For in less than ten minutes we’ll sink her in the deep.’

[VERSE 5]
But soon he found his great mistake--at five o’clock at night
We gave to them three daring cheers, and began the bloody fight.
This was their boasted frigate, in her they did confide,
But soon the bold Endymion pull’d down their Yankee pride.
Two hours and forty minutes, with courage void of fear,
This bloody fight we did maintain and swept her decks so clear.
When she haul’d down her colours our valiant captain cries,
‘Well done, well done, my brave boys, the President’s our prize!’

[VERSE 6]
We had twenty kill’d and wounded--thank God we had no more--
Whilst one hundred of those Yankees lay weltering in their gore,
And more than twenty wounded, most grevious was their cries,
Their bitter moans and dying groans did rend the very skies.

[VERSE 7]
The President she was well manned, five hundred was her crew;
Three hundred and forty the Endymion were, ’tis true;
Yet, nurs’d in the lap of victory, those Yankees did despise,
For we were all bold British tars and stout courageous boys.

[VERSE 8]
A curious observation, twelve months that day were spent
Since this proud Yankee commodore a challenge to us sent.
We joyfully accepted it, British honour to defend,
But our commodore would not permit, nor yet the same commend.

[VERSE 9]
Full sore it grieved bold Captain Hope that contest to decline,
But now he may exult and say, ‘Decatur, you are mine;
I long’d to meet you on this coast and sought you with much toil,
And since I have you snug on board, I’ll shew you British soil.’

[VERSE 10]
This action we’ll record in the annals of British fame,
Her sixty-three to forty-eight it was unequal game.
Since we left Plymouth Harbour in eighteen hundred and thirteen,
All along the Yankee coast we have thirty prizes ta’en.

[VERSE 11]
Bold Captain Hope commanded us, his praises we’ll proclaim,
To him the greatest honour’s due, he merits British fame.
‘Be silent, men!’ was all his cry. ‘Bring all your guns to bear,
And do not fire one shot in vain; both round and grape prepare.’
It would take the quill of Homer or Virgil to indite
The valour of our officers display’d upon that night:
Our undaunted first lieutenant, bold Morgan of renown,
Mr. Garson, Mr. Ormon, bold Fanshaw and Yeaman.

[VERSE 12]
But on the seventeenth, brave boys, at twelve o’clock at night
We lost our fore and main mast, to us a doleful sight;
To see us in this dreadful gale an adamant heart would weep,
Our quarter-deck and forecastle guns we plunged in the deep.
But soon we rigged our jurymast when that the gale was o’er,
The weather it came fine and clear, the billows ceas’d to roar;
But soon another gale arose, which lasted three whole days,
In the Gulph Stream we were toss’d about, tremendous were the seas.

[VERSE 13]
Our prize she was dismasted and much injury sustain’d;
Thank God she’s now arrived safe, the anchorage she’s gain’d.
Thus kind Heaven protected us, all dangers we surviv’d,
For now in sweet Bermuda our ship and she’s arriv’d.

[VERSE 14]
Now let Commodore Decatur and all his Yankee crew
Write home to cowardly Madison what British tars can do,
Whilst our trophies we’ll bring home unto the British shore,
And cans of grog we’ll pledge, my boys, now tempests cease to roar.

[VERSE 15]
So fill to me a flowing bowl and let the toast go round:
God prosper long bold Captain Hope, with laurels he is crown’d;
Success to our bold officers and all our valiant crew,
And may all British seamen their victories pursue.

--- TITLE: The British Tars [item: PG76941-pg76941-183]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 17479-17514
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come all you thoughtless young men, a warning take by me,
And never leave your happy homes to sail the raging sea,
For I have ploughed the raging main this twenty years or more,
But now I’m turned adrift to starve upon my native shore.

[VERSE 2]
When war at first assail’d us I quickly left my trade,
Our country was in danger, I flew to lend my aid.
And in my country’s service, long, long fatigues I bore,
But now I’m turned adrift to starve upon my native shore.

[VERSE 3]
By storms and raging tempest shipwreck’d three times I’ve been,
And many a bloody battle upon the seas I’ve seen;
I’ve seen the cannon’s glaring flash, I’ve heard its murderous roar,
Tho’ now I’m turned adrift to starve upon my native shore.

[VERSE 4]
The British seaman’s valour to all the world is known,
We conquer still where’er we go, the action is our own.
The meteor flag of England triumphantly we bore;
But now we are turned adrift to starve upon our native shore.

[VERSE 5]
Should hostile fleets e’er venture upon the raging main,
True hearts of oak we British Tars we’ll push to sea again;
And bravely bring their ships to port as we have done before.
So help us now while we’re in want upon our native shore.

[VERSE 6]
Come pity, ye gentle strangers, a luckless British Tar,
In your defence he yet may hurl the thunderbolts of war.
Come lend some kind assistance, and heaven will bless your store,
For now I’m turned adrift to starve upon my native shore.

--- TITLE: The Fancy Frigate [item: PG76941-pg76941-184]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 17515-17614
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
It is of a fine Frigate, dare not mention her name;
And in the West Indies she bore great fame,
For cruel hard usage in every degree,
Like slaves in a galley we plough the salt sea.

[VERSE 2]
At four in the morning the game is begun,
To the cock-pit the waisters for buckets must run;
For fore and main topmen so loud they do bawl,
For sand and for stones both large and small.

[VERSE 3]
O Master Make-clever, you know very well,
He comes upon deck and cuts a great swell;
It’s ‘bear a hand here, boys,’ and ‘bear a hand there,’
And in the lee gangway he takes a broad sheer.

[VERSE 4]
Half a dozen he starts, and so he goes on;
You’re sure of a hiding, boys, every one;
For soldier or sailor he cares not a damn,
But he’ll hide you as long as you’re able to stand.

[VERSE 5]
Our decks being wash’d and our sheets being home,
Stand by your hammocks, boys, every one;
Seven turns with your lashings so equal must show,
And all of a size, boys, and through the hoop go.

[VERSE 6]
Our hammocks being stowed, and our breakfast done,
We’re ranked in divisions with our white hats all on;
With our speeguls and lashings so black they must shine,
With our white frocks and trousers we must all be a line.

[VERSE 7]
Our division officer then takes his round,
Not a hole nor a spot on your clothes must be found;
For an hour or more in this form we must be,
Our ropes they are flemished either in harbour or at sea.

[VERSE 8]
Our divisions being over, the next thing comes on,
Jack o’ Clubs he is calling for swabs in his song;
Three or four dry swabs each cook they must find,
And the bright iron hoops on our mess-kids must shine.

[VERSE 9]
There is pulling and hauling all the four hours round,
On deck or below there’s no peace to be found;
Either paint room, or store room, you’re sure for to clear,
To find out what blacking or paint is to spare.

[VERSE 10]
Pass the word for the painters, fore and aft is the cry,
Neither booms nor gangway I would have you draw nigh,
Nor yet in the ports I would have you be found,
For six dozen or more to your name will go round.

[VERSE 11]
Our boarding pikes and cutlasses are bright as the sun,
Our shot racks are copper, boys, every one;
Our pumelins and hand spikes and belaying pins also,
With our bright iron staunchions we cut a fine show.

[VERSE 12]
Neither combings or hatchway I’d have you go near,
From the bell or cook’s funnel I’d have you keep clear;
Nor yet in the galley I’d have you to go,
For a black thunder squall will take you in tow.
Now, my brave boys, comes the best of the fun,
All hands to make sail, going large is the song;
From under two reefs in our topsails we lie,
Like a cloud in the air in an instant must fly.

[VERSE 13]
There’s topsails, top-gallant sails, staysails also,
There’s stunsails on both sides aloft and below,
There’s royals, and skysails, stargazers so high,
By the sound of one pipe everything it must fly.

[VERSE 14]
Now, my brave boys, comes the best of the fun,
It’s hands about ship and reef topsails in one;
Our hands go aloft when the helm it goes down,
Lower away topsails when the mainyard goes round.

[VERSE 15]
Trice up and lie out, and take two reefs in one,
In a moment of time all this work must be done;
Man your head braces, your haulyards, and all,
And hoist away topsails when it’s let go and haul.

[VERSE 16]
As for the use of tobacco, all thoughts leave behind;
If you spit upon deck then your death warrant’s signed
If you spit overboard either gangway or stern,
You are sure of six dozen by the way of no harm.

[VERSE 17]
But worse than all this, I have known them to stop
A week’s wine or grog if you spill but one drop;
Either forward or aft I would have you keep clear,
Or the bell, or cook’s funnel, will fall to your share.

[VERSE 18]
Come, all brother seamen, wherever you be,
From all fancy frigates I’d have you keep clear;
Take compassion all on us, and never forget,
Those poor pipe-clay rangers so called of late.

--- TITLE: The Saucy Scylla [item: PG76941-pg76941-185]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 17615-17678
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come all you who delight in a frolicksome song,
Concerning the Scylla it will not keep you long;
Concerning the Scylla, a ship of great fame,
She had the Bahama station, and bore a great name.

[VERSE 2]
At four in the morning the work it came on,
For sand and for holy stones loud was the song;
For fore and main topmen loud was the call,
For sand and for holy stones both great and small.

[VERSE 3]
The next thing to divisions your hammocks you bring,
You must have them as snug and as round as a ring;
With your lanyards and lacings, all made up so neat,
Or to carry them all day on our shoulders was our fate.

[VERSE 4]
There is someone we know well, a British old Turk,
Would go creeping and snarling as the men were at work;
‘Hurrah! bear a hand, men, or you I’ll report:’
Then he’d walk you on the carpet like a prisoner at court.
Two bells in the evening--’twas the drummer once more--
Beat all hands to quarters with your bayonets and swords.
‘Cast loose, clear for action,’ our lieutenant cries,
With the rest of good drilling and much exercise.

[VERSE 5]
After quarters was over, there was one thing more,
All hands to reef top sails, which grieved us full sore;
‘Men, man the rigging,’ our lieutenant would cry,
Rise up, and lay out your reef points to tie.
In less than two minutes our top sails must be reef’d,
All sail set above them so snug and complete;
For black-listing and drilling grieved us to the heart,
For our six-watered grog it just measured one quart.

[VERSE 6]
As we lay in Providence so neat and so clean,
With scraping and painting we did take great pains;
With scraping and scouring from morning ’till night,
It was swabbing, dum-scraping that was their delight.

[VERSE 7]
We ranged them Bahamas by night and by day,
Every creek and every island like a lion for his prey;
In search of those slave ships it was our intent,
’Till at last came to Nassaw, where our relief was sent.

[VERSE 8]
Very soon for Port Royal we then did make sail,
Favoured by Neptune and a sweet, pleasant gale;
When we arrived there, what grieved us full sore,
We were ordered on the Spanish main for two months or more.

[VERSE 9]
But now we are arrived in England once more,
How our spirits did rise, glad to see our own shore;
Our friends and relations they came in our sight,
For fear of them entering, their look-out was bright.

[VERSE 10]
But now my song is ended, I have no more to say,
But our saucy little Scylla she carried the sway;
For in reefing and furling she was always the best,
Throughout the West Indies, for we had scarce any rest.

--- TITLE: The Vanguard [item: PG76941-pg76941-186]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 17679-17742
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come, all you seamen, stout and bold, and listen to my song,
It’s worth your whole attention, I’ll not detain you long.

[CHORUS]

      Then let us sing the Vanguard’s praise, proclaim her valiant
          name,
      Cruel usage I have met with since I sail’d in the same.

[VERSE 2]
Concerning of the Vanguard, a ship of noble fame,
With her r---- commander, Mickey Walker call’d by name.

[VERSE 3]
At four o’clock you must turn out, the decks to holystone;
One and all you must go down upon your marrow bones.

[VERSE 4]
Then Mr. Croycraft comes on deck, and he’ll begin to curse and swear;
Both watches of gunners send up on deck to see your lashings are
    all square.

[VERSE 5]
At eight o’clock it’s up top-gallant yards, to the mast-head you
    must run,
And if you are not the first ship, your name is taken down.

[VERSE 6]
Then down from the mast-head to the gangway you must repair,
And there is the gratings rigged ready to punish you there.

[VERSE 7]
And when on shore by leave you go, if beyond your time you stay,
Then you are put on the stage party for the space of sixty days.

[VERSE 8]
Then next you’re put in chokey, boys, you get both thin and white;
And if you break your liberty, scrub copper from morning till night.

[VERSE 9]
But if you are in the black list, as true as I’m a sinner,
Then you must polish brass-work while the crew are at their dinner.
But if a fighting you do go, you’ll never get any rest;
They will drive you off the lower deck, in the galley for to mess.

[VERSE 10]
And when you are in the galley mess, your heart is fill’d with woe;
Your monthly money it is stopt, on shore you must not go.

[VERSE 11]
Now, you seamen of the Vanguard, you had better not get drunk;
You will be laid upon your back, and they’ll use the stomach pump.

[VERSE 12]
If your hammock it is dirty, and you know no reason why,
Then you must scrub it in the head, carry it on a boat-hook to dry.

[VERSE 13]
There’s a man on our lower deck, he is called Jondy Cross;
If I had my will of him, I’d overboard him toss.

[VERSE 14]
But when on shore the bully comes, if with him you should fall in,
The w----e that gives to him a drubbing shall have a gown and a
    gallon of gin.

[VERSE 15]
So now to conclude, and finish my song;
I am a saucy mizen-top man, to the Vanguard does belong.
But if to sea I go again, I’d sooner swing in a halter,
Before I’d sail in any ship commanded by Mickey Walker.

--- TITLE: The Port Admiral [item: PG76941-pg76941-187]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 17743-17844
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
’Twas at the landing place that’s just below Mount Wyse,
Poll leaned against the sentry’s box, a tear in both her eyes:
Her apron twisted round her arms, all for to keep them warm,
Being a windy Christmas Day, and also a snow-storm.
          And Bet and Sue
          Both stood there too,
              A-shivering by her side;
          They both were dumb,
          And both look’d glum
              As they watched the ebbing tide.
          Poll put her arms a-kimbo:
              At the admiral’s house look’d she;
          To thoughts before in limbo,
              She now a vent gave free.
You have sent the ship in a gale to work,
  On a lee-shore to be jammed;
I’ll give you a piece of my mind, old Turk:
  Port Admiral, you be damned.

[CHORUS]

      We’ll give you a piece of our mind, old Turk:
          Port Admiral, you be damned.

[VERSE 2]
Whoever heard in the sarvice of a frigate made to sail
On Christmas Day, it blowing hard, with sleet, and snow, and hail?
I wish I had the fishing of your back that is so bent,
I’d use the galley poker hot, unto your heart’s content.
          Here Bet and Sue
          Are with me too,
              A-shivering by my side;
          They both are dumb,
          And both look glum,
              And watch the ebbing tide.
          Poll put her arms a-kimbo:
              At the admiral’s house looked she;
          To thoughts that were in limbo,
              She now a vent gave free.
You’ve got a roaring fire, I’ll bet:
  In it your toes are jammed;
Let’s give him a piece of our mind, my Bet:
  Port Admiral, you be damned!

[CHORUS]

      Let’s give him a piece of our mind, my Bet:
          Port Admiral, you be damned.

[VERSE 3]
I had the flour, and plums all picked, and suet all chopped fine,
To mix into a pudding rich, for all the mess to dine:
I pawn’d my ear-rings for the beef, it weighed at least a stone:
Now my fancy man is sent to sea, and I am left alone.
          Here’s Bet and Sue
          Who stand here too,
              A-shivering by my side;
          They both are dumb,
          They both look glum,
              And watch the ebbing tide.
          Poll put her arms a-kimbo:
          At the admiral’s house look’d she;
          To thoughts that were in limbo,
              She now a vent gave free:
You’ve got a turkey, I’ll be bound,
  With which you will be crammed;
I’ll give you a bit of my mind, old hound:
  Port Admiral, you be damned.
[CHORUS]

[VERSE 4]
      We’ll give you a bit of our mind, old hound:
          Port Admiral, you be damned.

[VERSE 5]
I’m sure that in this weather they cannot cook their meat:
To eat it raw on Christmas Day will be a pleasant treat;
But let us all go home, girls; it’s no use waiting here:
We’ll hope that Christmas Day to come they’ll have a better cheer.
          So Bet and Sue,
          Don’t stand here too,
              A-shivering by my side;
          Don’t keep so dumb,
          Don’t look so glum,
              Nor watch the ebbing tide.
          Poll put her arms a-kimbo:
              At the admiral’s house look’d she;
          To thoughts that were in limbo,
              She now a vent gave free.
So while they cut their raw salt junks,
  With dainties you’ll be cramm’d;
Here’s once for all my mind, old hunks:
  Port Admiral, you be damned.

[CHORUS]

      So once for all our mind, old hunks:
          Port Admiral, you be damned.

--- TITLE: Oh! Cruel [item: PG76941-pg76941-188]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 17845-17878
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Oh! cruel were my parents to tear my love from me,
And cruel were the press-gang that took him off to sea,
And cruel was the little boat that row’d him from the strand,
And cruel was the great big ship that sailed from the land.
                            Sing too rol lo, etc.
Oh! cruel was the water that bore her love from Mary,
And cruel was the fair wind that would not blow contrary;
And cruel was the captain, the boatswain and the men,
Who didn’t care a farthing if we ever met again.

[VERSE 2]
Oh! cruel was the splinter to break my deary’s leg,
Now he’s obliged to fiddle, and I’m obliged to beg:
A vagabonding vagrant, and a rantipoling wife,
We fiddle, limp, and scrape it, thro’ the ups and downs of life.
Oh! cruel was th’ engagement in which my true love fought,
And cruel was the cannon-ball that knock’d his right eye out;
He us’d to leer and ogle me with peepers full of fun,
But now he looks askew at me, because he has but one.

[VERSE 3]
My love he plays the fiddle, and wanders up and down,
And I sing at his elbow thro’ all the streets in town.
We spend our days in harmony, and very seldom fight,
Except when he’s his grog aboard, and I get queer at night.
Then ladies all take warning by my true love and me,
Tho’ cruel fate should cross you, remember constancy;
Like me you’ll be rewarded, and have your heart’s delight,
With fiddling in the morning, and a drop of gin at night.

--- TITLE: The Answer To Oh! Cruel [item: PG76941-pg76941-189]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 17879-17916
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Oh! cruel was thy parents that envied our love,
And cruel was the press-gang that gave me such a shove,
That took me head and heels and put me in a sack,
And to the water side one took me on his back.
                              Singing too rol loo rol, etc.

[VERSE 2]
I thought I was to die, so I began to pray,
‘Why hang your lazy hide,’ one unto me did say,
‘If you don’t hold your clack I’ll throw you overboard.’
I thought to my dear Poll I shall never be restor’d.

[VERSE 3]
They soon a sailor made me with their cuffs and whip,
I never lik’d their notions, I so often had to strip.
The enemy appear’d. Oh! dreadful was the sight,
The tarry lads so cheerfully preparing for the fight.

[VERSE 4]
The captain loudly bawling every man to his gun,
I tried to skulk away, thinking I had none;
But I very soon found out my skulking would not do,
For an officer with sword in hand would quickly run me through.

[VERSE 5]
I waddled to the deck, but I rolled like an egg,
When there came a whacking cannon-ball and took away my leg.
I tumbled on my back and vented forth a sigh,
When a bullet in a twinkling knock’d out my poor right eye.

[VERSE 6]
So from the cruel wars I am safe at home again,
And by my fiddling a livelyhood obtain,
And now you have proved true how happy shall we be--
We’ll pass the days and nights in love and harmony.

[VERSE 7]
Tho’ cruel was my fortune I haven’t lost the way
Of getting grog at night by fiddling all the day;
And tho’ I am depriv’d by a cruel cannon-ball,
She’d rather have me as I am then ne’er a man at all.

--- TITLE: The Female Lieutenant; Or, Faithless Lover Rewarded [item: PG76941-pg76941-190]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 17917-17976
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
William was a youthful lover,
William lov’d a lady fair;
Bells did ring and birds did sing,
As to the church they did repair.

[VERSE 2]
Then came twenty brisk young sailors,
Drest in grand and rich array;
Instead of William being married,
Prest he was and sent away.

[VERSE 3]
Soon his true love follow’d after,
By the name of William Carr;
Her soft hands and milk-white fingers,
All were smear’d with pitch and tar.

[VERSE 4]
Now behold the first engagement,
Bold she fought among the rest;
Her jacket open, void of danger,
All expos’d her snow-white breast.

[VERSE 5]
When the captain came to hear it,
He said, ‘What wind has brought you here?’
‘Kind sir, I came to find my true love,
Him you prest I love so dear.’

[VERSE 6]
‘If that you came to find your true love,
Tell to me his name, I pray?’
‘Brave sir, they call him William Taylor,
Him you prest and forc’d away.’

[VERSE 7]
‘If William Taylor is your true love
He is both cruel and severe,
For rise up early in the morning
You shall see him and his lady fair.

[VERSE 8]
‘For he some days ago was wedded
And lives upon the Isle of Man,
And with his beauteous bride has bedded
A truth that none deny it can.’

[VERSE 9]
Then she rose early in the morning,
Early by the break of day,
There she saw sweet William Taylor
Walking with his lady gay.
She call’d quickly for a pistol,
It was brought at her command;
Strait she shot sweet William Taylor,
With the same soon out of hand.

[VERSE 10]
When the captain saw the wonder
Which the maiden fair had done,
He instantly made her lieutenant
Of the gallant Thunder Bomb.

--- TITLE: Billy Taylor [item: PG76941-pg76941-191]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 17977-18045
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Billy Taylor was a gay young fellow,
  Full of mirth, and full of glee;
And his heart he did diskiver
  To a lady fair and free.
                              Fol lol etc.

[VERSE 2]
Four-and-twenty stout young fellows,
  Clad they were in blue array,
Came and press’d young Billy Taylor,
  And forthwith sent him to sea.
                              Fol lol, etc.

[VERSE 3]
Soon his true love follow’d arter,
  Under the name of Richard Carr;
And her lily white hands she daub’d all over
  With the nasty pitch and tar.
                              Fol lol, etc.

[VERSE 4]
When they came to the first engagement,
  Bold she fit amongst the rest,
Until a cannon-ball cut her jacket open,
  And diskivered her lily white breast.
                              Fol lol, etc.

[VERSE 5]
When the captain com’d for to hear on’t,
  Says he ‘Vat vind has blown you here?’
Says she ‘I come to seek for my true love,
  Whom you press’d, and I love so dear.’
                              Fol lol, etc.

[VERSE 6]
‘If you come to seek for your true love,
  Tell unto me his name, I pray?’
‘His name, kind sir, is Billy Taylor,
  Whom you press’d, and sent to sea.’
                              Fol lol, etc.

[VERSE 7]
‘If his name is Billy Taylor,
  He’s both cruel and severe;
For rise up early in the morning,
  And you’ll see him with a lady fair.’
                              Fol lol, etc.
With that she ros’d up in the morning,
  Early as by break of day;
And she met her Billy Taylor
  Walking with a lady gay.
                              Fol lol, etc.

[VERSE 8]
Forthwith she call’d for sword and pistol,
  Which did come at her command,
And she shot her Billy Taylor,
  With his fair one in his hand.
                              Fol lol, etc.

[VERSE 9]
When the captain com’d for to hear on’t,
  He werry much applauded her for what she had done;
And quickly he made her the first lieutenant
  Of the gallant Thunder Bomb.
                              Fol lol, etc.

--- TITLE: Cawsand Bay [item: PG76941-pg76941-192]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 18046-18112
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
In Cawsand Bay lying,
        The Blue Peter flying,
And all hands turned up for the anchor to weigh;
        There came a young lady,
        As fresh as a May day,
And modestly hailing, this damsel did say:
        ‘I want my young man, there,
        Do you hear! bear a han’ there,
To hoist me on board, or to send him to me;
        His name’s Henry Grady,
        And I am a lady
Come off to prevent him from going to sea.’

[VERSE 2]
        The captain, his honour,
        When he looked upon her,
Ran down the ship’s side for to help her aboard;
        Says he with emotion,
        ‘What son of the ocean
Can thus be looked after by Helena Ford?’
        The lady made answer:
        ‘That there is my man, sir,
I’ll make him as fine and as free as a lord;’
        ‘No, no,’ says the cap’n,
        ‘That can’t very well happen,
I’ve got sailing orders; you, sir, stay on board.’

[VERSE 3]
        ‘Avast,’ says the lady,
        ‘Don’t you heed him, Henry Grady,
He once was your captain, but now you’re at large;
        You shan’t stay aboard here,
        For all that man’s order;’
Then out of her bosom she hauled his discharge.

[VERSE 4]
        Says the captain, says he now:
        ‘I’m blowed, but he’s free now’;
Says Jack, ‘Let old Weatherface keep all my clothes;’
        On shore then he steered her,
        And the lads they all cheered her,
But the captain was jealous, and looked down his nose.

[VERSE 5]
        Then she got a shore tailor
        To rig her young sailor
In tight Nankin breeches, and a blue long-tailed coat;
        And he looked like a squire
        For all to admire,
With a dimity handkerchief tied round his throat.

[VERSE 6]
        And they had a house greater
        Than e’er a first-rater,
With servants in uniform handing the drink;
        And a garden to go in
        Where the flowers was a-blowin’,
The daisy, the buttercup, lily and pink.

[VERSE 7]
        And he got education
        Quite fit for his station,
For you know we are never too old for to learn;
        And his shipmates they found him,
        With his young ones around him,
All chips of the old block, from the stem to the stern.

--- TITLE: General Campbell [item: PG76941-pg76941-193]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 18113-18164
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
It was in the month of April, upon the fourteenth day,
This expedition did embark to cross the raging sea;
Our fleet being well prepared, our anchors we did weigh,
To sail against the Burmese to show them British play.
When we embark’d from Madras it grieved our hearts full sore,
Our wives and children weeping as they sat on the shore,
Crying, ‘Art thou gone and left us thy absence for to mourn,
To languish on a foreign land awaiting thy return?’

[VERSE 2]
We left the roads of Madras upon the sixteenth day;
Each man being well prepared and eager for the fray,
Our squadron form’d a brilliant line to shew a grand half-moon:
With British colours flying, we sailed against Rangoon.
When we were three days sailing, three sails appear’d in view;
We fir’d off a signal gun, when quickly they lay to:
Our commodore bore down on them, we followed him in line,
But they proved to be some British troops awaiting us to join.

[VERSE 3]
Next to Port Cornwallis our course we then did steer,
And hoisted all our stunsails without either dread or fear.
The next thing that appear’d in view was the Calcutta fleet,
Was lying there at anchor, all waiting us to meet.
Our fleet being assembled (the sail was sixty-three)
A signal gun for sailing was fired instantly;
When out to sea we bore again, and sailed both night and day,
And on the tenth of May, my boys, we anchor’d in their bay.

[VERSE 4]
It was early the next morning, the weather being fair,
We weigh’d our anchors to the bows, and up the river did steer.
The enemy commenced on shore to put us to the rout;
But we upon the decks did stand, resolved to fight it out.
The Lilly frigate led the way, when clouds of smoke did rise,
The Leander sloop in company, which did our foes surprise;
The Sophia brig and gun boats, their cannon loud did roar,
Like thunder rent the elements all on the Burmese shore.

[VERSE 5]
‘All hands prepare for landing!’ resounded through the fleet;
‘Let every man have sixty rounds his enemy for to meet.’
Like lions bold we rushed on shore at ten o’clock that day:
These cowardly dogs could not us stand, we forced them to give way.

[VERSE 6]
Now Rangoon we have taken, let us drink unto our king;
May all his loyal subjects fresh laurels to him bring.
Likewise to General Campbell, who commanded on that day,
And pull’d their saucy peacock down on the eleventh day of May.

--- TITLE: The Bold Adventures Of Captain Ross [item: PG76941-pg76941-194]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 18165-18235
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

# APPARATUS: Air--Tars of the ‘Blanche.’

[VERSE 1]
Come listen awhile with attention,
  You seamen and landsmen likewise,
While I of a hero will mention
  Which England, fam’d England, should prize.
Bold Ross was our noble commander,
  His equal was ne’er seen before;
But mark what us sailors went under
  When we sailed from Old England’s shore.

[VERSE 2]
We sail’d to the Pacific Ocean,
  Our hearts both undaunted and free,
Bold Ross cheered us all with the notion
  That we should all prosperous be;
But our mainmast was soon smashed to pieces
  While we hauled in the ship Fury’s store.
Said Ross, ‘Now the tempest increases,
  ’Tis for honour of Old England’s shore.’

[VERSE 3]
Long time in tempestuous weather,
  ’Midst rocks, ice and water were we;
We were staunch, bold, and vowed to each other
  To die or the North Pole to see.
Ross espied from the ship’s starboard quarter
  The land that did add to their store--
Crying, ‘Look out, my boys, for fresh water,
  We’re far from Old England’s shore.’

[VERSE 4]
Our hardships we bore, and were ready
  To follow our brave captain’s call,
Who was bold, was undaunted but ready,
  His study alone was us all;
While we roamed o’er the cold stormy regions,
  On wilds that were ne’er trod before,
No cot, house, or church or religion,
  Like those upon Old England’s shore.

[VERSE 5]
You may talk about Parry and Cook, boys,
  Who tried these cold regions to find--
Only a short trip they took, boys,
  Then left the bright magnet behind.
Bold Ross left the British flag flying,
  Which no one could e’er do before,
Then light-hearted, though nearly dying,
  Came with glory to Old England’s shore.

[VERSE 6]
’Twas thought that no one since Creation
  Would find it until time did end;
But King William’s name of this nation
  So proud on that magnet does bend.
So build for bold Ross a fine pillar,
  And cast it with gold letters o’er;
Bold Ross brav’d the wave, ice, and billow,
  In triumph reached Old England’s shore.

[VERSE 7]
This hero, the pride of our nation,
  Gained honour, likewise his ship’s crew;
May they rise into dignity’s station
  For being undaunted and true.
Bold Ross, as a pledge of honour,
  With the Lord Mayor of London did dine,
And they gave him three cheers and a bumper,
  Drank to trade and to commerce in wine.

--- TITLE: The Capture Of St. Jean D’Acre [item: PG76941-pg76941-195]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 18236-18299
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come, all you old warlike liners, who boast of deeds of war
Achieved by famous Nelson in the glorious days of yore,
Hear what has happened lately along the Syrian coast:
The downfall of the Egyptians, of which we made our boast.
      So here’s a health to brave Napier; to brave Napier huzza!
      Who conquered the Egyptians, and made them run away.
On the first day of November, and forty was the year,
The Wasp off St. Jean d’Acre arrived, as you may hear.
That night we anchor’d in the bay, and lay there all the night;
At half-past ten the following day, the squadron hove in sight.

[VERSE 2]
As they came in they anchor’d, and furl’d without more ado;
But some of us kept under weigh, the Castor, Wasp, and Co.
The next forenoon they all did weigh, (it was our admiral’s plan)
To close with St. Jean d’Acre; the Powerful led the van.

[VERSE 3]
We took up our positions, abreast of Acre town,
Determin’d, if they’d not give in, to knock their ramparts down.
A flag of truce was then sent in, but they refused to treat
Or come to any peaceful terms with this gallant British fleet.

[VERSE 4]
At half-past two that afternoon the action did begin:
Our shot and shell swift flew like hail, the ramparts soon fell in;
The flagship and the Powerful showed them smart British play,
Against the noble Benbow’s fire the Egyptians could not stay.

[VERSE 5]
The Castor acted well her part: the foe strove hard to shake her,
But rather hot she sent her shot ’gainst the forts of St. Jean
    d’Acre.
The Edinburgh and Revenge, the Carysfort and Pique,
The Hazard and the Talbot made them think of quick retreat.

[VERSE 6]
The saucy Thunderer that day poured forth her British thunder,
Knowing well it was the surest way to make her foes knock under.
Besides, four steamers fit for war were there, I am proud to tell;
They harassed well our enemy with death-conveying shell.

[VERSE 7]
The warlike brave Bellerophon is worthy of her name;
For as she ranged up to the forts she poured forth smoke and flame.
Austrian frigates and the Turks, although in number few,
By Britons led they did their best--great praise to them is due.
Then comes the little stinging Wasp, her weight in gold she’s
    worth;
For under the walls of Acre she took a liner’s berth:
As close as ever she could get, her captain strove to take her,
And sprung her broadsides to the forts, and stung poor St. Jean
    d’Acre.

[VERSE 8]
That afternoon, at four o’clock, we heard a dreadful roar:
Each vessel trembled at the shock, each eye was turned on shore.
One of their magazines blew up, it was an awful sight;
Death made an awful conquest there, the heavens were black as night.

[VERSE 9]
The poor Egyptians, paralysed, scarce knew what course to take,
And after five they all began their quarters to forsake:
A general terror soon was spread throughout the shattered town;
They confess’d us British conquerors and haul’d their colours down.

--- TITLE: The Borneo Heroes [item: PG76941-pg76941-196]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 18300-18341
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Come, all you jolly sailors bold, the truth you soon shall know
Concerning of a glorious fight on the Isle of Borneo.
As we were cruising off the coast we heard the dreadful news
How the pirates they had massacred our merchants’ crews.
    Huzza! huzza! huzza! huzza! with Captain Talbot, boys, we’ll
        die or win the day!

[VERSE 2]
The news it flew like lightning, from ship to ship it ran:
Admiral Cochrane gave the word, brave Talbot led the van;
And soon we manned all our boats, and down the river flew.
Brave Talbot he commanded us with all the vessel’s crew.
                                      Huzza, etc.

[VERSE 3]
When we came up to the boom we found it so secure,
The cannon from their batteries on us poor lads did pour;
But soon we cut our way through, like lions sprang on shore,
And soon five hundred pirates lay bleeding in their gore.
                                      Huzza, etc.

[VERSE 4]
While they were bleeding in their gore we rushed into their town,
And there the produce of many a gallant ship we found;
For plunder and distribution, boys, it was our whole intent:
In one hour and twenty minutes the town to ashes sent.
                                      Huzza, etc.

[VERSE 5]
When we returned to our admiral and told him the glorious news,
‘Three cheers, my boys, for England, and all the gallant crews!’
So we’ll drink to Admiral Cochrane, and gallant Talbot too,
The officers of the squadron, and all the vessel’s crew.
                                      Huzza, etc.
Now we have returned to England, to let our friends all know
How we destroyed the pirates on the coast of Borneo;
For we left the flag of England by all nations to be seen:
And for our reward we’ll boldly go, boys, to our gracious Queen.
                                      Huzza, etc.

--- TITLE: The Slave Chase [item: PG76941-pg76941-197]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 18342-18373
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
Set every stitch of canvas to woo the fresh’ning wind;
Our bowsprit points to Cuba, the coast lies far behind.
Filled to the hatches full, my boys, across the seas we go;
There’s twice five hundred niggers in the stifling hold below.
‘A sail! What say you, boys? Well--let him give us chase
A British man-of-war you say--well, let him try the race;
There’s not a swifter vessel ever floated on the waves
Than our tidy little schooner well ballasted with slaves.’

[VERSE 2]
Now stronger yet and stronger still came down the fiery breeze,
And ever fast and faster sped the strange ship on the seas,
Flinging each rude and bursting surge in glittering haloes back,
And bearing high to heaven aloft the English Union Jack!
‘Now curses on that ensign,’ the slaving captain said;
‘There’s little luck for slavers when the English bunting’s spread.
But pack on sail and trim the ship; before we’ll captured be
We’ll have the niggers up, my boys, and heave them in the sea.’
Hoarse was the slaving captain’s voice, and deep the oath he swore:
‘Haul down the flag; that’s shot enough, we don’t want any more.’
Alongside dashed the cruiser’s boat to board and seize the prize.
Hark to that rattling British cheer that’s ringing to the skies!
‘Up, up with the negroes speedily; up, up, and give them breath;
Clear out the hold from stem to stern: that noisome den is death;
And run aloft St. George’s Cross, all wanton let it wave,
The token proud that under it there never treads a slave.’

--- TITLE: The Russians Won’T Come Out [item: PG76941-pg76941-198]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 18374-18413
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
What can we luckless sailors do? no fun comes to our share;
The enemy keeps out of view--to meet us they won’t dare!
In vain our pennants fly so gay, our cruisers roam about,
We might as well in Portsmouth lay--the Russians won’t come out!

[VERSE 2]
In Helsingfors they lay quite close; ’neath Cronstadt mole they
    crowd;
They’ll not come out and meet the foes whom once they dared so loud.
Like to some worn-out batter’d hulk each gallant ship so stout
Behind the batteries does skulk--the cowards won’t come out!

[VERSE 3]
The Arrogant and Hecla, too, gave them a lesson rough;
Tho’ fighting to our lads was new they proved both smart and tough;
They strewed the ground with soldiers gay, their batteries knocked
    about,
And brought their merchant ships away, yet still they won’t come out!
While in the Baltic we deplore our idle time at sea,
Our comrades on the Turkish shore are as badly off as we.
Though many ships they’ve made their own, ta’en many a strong
    redoubt,
And batter’d half Odessa down, the Russians won’t come out!

[VERSE 4]
That mighty man, Prince Menschikoff, in harbour still does lie,
And at the Allied Fleets does scoff as they are sailing by.
‘Don’t think,’ says he, ‘that I’m a fool, a valiant, headstrong lout;
I’m safe and snug in Sebastopol, and be hanged if I’ll come out.’

[VERSE 5]
Oh! would they but their anchors weigh and boldly put to sea,
With joy to see a sight so gay how full each heart would be;
But oh! such wishes are in vain: they know there’s little doubt,
They never would get in again if once they venture out.

--- TITLE: Don’T Forget Your Old Shipmate [item: PG76941-pg76941-199]
--- SOURCE: PG76941 plain-text lines 18414-18460
--- AUTHOR: Anonymous (not attributed in item)

[VERSE 1]
We’re the boys that fear no noise
  Whilst thundering cannons roar,
And long we’ve toiled on the rolling wave,
  And now we’re safe on shore.
        Don’t forget your old shipmate,
              Fol de rol.

[VERSE 2]
Since we sailed from Plymouth Sound,
  Four years gone, to-night, Jack,
Were there ever chummies known,
  Such as you and I, Jack?
        Don’t forget, etc.

[VERSE 3]
We have served the self-same gun,
  Quarter-deck division,
Sponger I, and loader you,
  Through the whole commission.
        Don’t forget, etc.

[VERSE 4]
Oftentimes have we laid out,
  Toil nor danger fearing,
Hauling out the flapping sail
  To the weather ear-ring.
        Don’t forget, etc.

[VERSE 5]
When the middle watch was on,
  And the time went slow, boy,
Who could tune a rousing stave,
  Who like Jack or Joe, boy?
        Don’t forget, etc.

[VERSE 6]
There she swings an empty hulk,
  Not a soul below now;
Number seven, starboard mess,
  Misses Jack and Joe now.
        Don’t forget, etc.
But the best of friends must part,
  Fair or foul the weather;
Tip us your flipper for a shake,
  Now a drink together;
        And don’t forget your old shipmate, etc.
